#### Prose 

तमुवाच हृषीकेश: प्रहसन्निव भारत |
सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये विषीदन्तमिदं वच: || 10||
tam-uvācha hṛiṣhīkeśhaḥ prahasanniva bhārata
senayorubhayor-madhye viṣhīdantam-idaṁ vachaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Bharat [Dhritarashtra]! Hrishikesh began to laugh, and, in the place situated between the soldiers of both sides, said these words to the despondent Arjuna. 

 #### Commentary 

Just as that kind of [aforementioned] “tushnibhava” comes forth, Hrishikesh begins to laugh – meaning: the rays of the tenderly brilliant Light fills and fully radiates the inner sky; the heart becomes filled with thrilling joy. (That Light – that Bliss – cannot be described by language. One who – having given up doership as stated in slokas 6 and 7 [of this Chapter 2], and thus having become a blindly-following disciple – has reached that state of non-doing silence – only that one sees [this Light] and understands.) But because at this time the mind, even though staying just as itself within itself [and not taking any support], is situated between the present vrittis divided into two sides, the “despondent feeling” part still remains in [the sadhak]. Then, from the Kutastha, spoken teachings come forth softly — Begin Footnote. —  If one keeps a sattvic diet, conducts oneself with sattvic behavior, and follows the instructions of guru in a sattvic way, within a time that is not lengthy, the Gita and Gayatri [sacred mantra] go on being spoken [within] automatically and on their own. This can be heard. This is why the Vedas and Upanishads are called “shruti” [that which is heard]. The spiritual teachings are not created by human beings. The one who, with sincere faith, goes on the path instructed by satguru – he/she is the one who knows the truth of this. And the one who will continue to move [on the path] – he/she will also be able [to know the truth of this]. It cannot be known or made known by language or by guessing/inferential logic! If one is a bhogi [immersed enjoyer] of worldly enjoyments, this state cannot be known. — End Footnote. — (the feeling/experience springs up). The one who has been in that state and has heard those teachings – it is he/she who can truly be called fortunate. That is the one whose life is truly successful; that is [the sadhak] who is truly a “person.”