#### Prose 

यथैधांसि समिद्धोऽग्निर्भस्मसात्कुरुतेऽर्जुन |
ज्ञानाग्नि: सर्वकर्माणि भस्मसात्कुरुते तथा || 37||
yathaidhānsi samiddho ’gnir bhasma-sāt kurute ’rjuna
jñānāgniḥ sarva-karmāṇi bhasma-sāt kurute tathā

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Arjuna! As the flaming fire burns all wood to ashes, similarly, the fire of gyana [knowledge] burns all karma to ashes.

 #### Commentary 

If the gyani [one who has gyana] goes up to the Sahasrar and sits there, because of being beyond karma, karma cannot at all touch that gyani. But then what kind of state that gyani is in after coming down and being part of the worldly experience again – that is being stated in this sloka. Karma is of three types. First: “prarabdha karma” - that which began the bestowing of fruits – meaning: that karma whose fruit is this body. Second: “sanchit karma” - the karma whose fruits are being gathered. They have not yet begun to come forth. They will blossom later. Third: “bhaavi karma” - the karma [act that will bring fruit] that has not yet been performed. It will happen later. As the parts of water and air in the wood evaporate with the power of fire, and only the earth part in the form of ashes remain – and even that is extremely light and fine – in just the same way, when gyana [Knowledge] dawns, the “sanchit karma” leaves the “karmi” [doer of karma; doer of actions] and merges into the Great Sky. When “bhaavi karma” gets acted out, it cannot bind the karmi, who is like the lotus being untouched by the water. And the “prarabdha karma” - this body – that stays all right, but becomes like ashes. Through the attainment of all perfections, the body comes to be under the power of the Spirit in such a way that it can never again overcome the karmi. The experiences of karma, life, death – all become subjects of the power of the wishes of the gyani.