#### Prose 

तद्विद्धि प्रणिपातेन परिप्रश्नेन सेवया |
उपदेक्ष्यन्ति ते ज्ञानं ज्ञानिनस्तत्त्वदर्शिन: || 34||
tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśhnena sevayā
upadekṣhyanti te jñānaṁ jñāninas tattva-darśhinaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Through submission, enquiry and service, be resolved to know that “gyana” [knowledge]. (If that is done) the spiritually seeing teachers will instruct you in gyana.

 #### Commentary 

What gyana is – there are three means of knowing that: “pranipat” [submission], “pariprashna” [enquiry] and “seva” [service]. [All of] these, due to the differences in the gross and subtle levels, are of two categories. One has to do full prostration with devotedness to the spiritual preceptor gurudev; ask “what is liberation? what is ‘vidya’ [knowledge]? what is ‘avidya’ [not-knowing]” etc., and serve in the way of taking care, attending and such. If this type of devotion dawns, the guru is pleased and initiates/instructs knowledge. The means to know gyana in the gross level is this. And looking at Guru's feet at Kutastha and moving prana-vayu from one place and then properly placing prana-vayu in different places (pranayam learned from the mouth of guru), and with that, doing service in the way of reciting the Pranava mentally in “ayata utterance” [see footnote to the commentary of sloka 3:30], and mentally asking about matters that should be known – these are the subtle means. When, through this subtle practice, mind stops having contact with the worldly experience, the gurus show themselves, and through revelation of spiritual wisdom, they attract the mind of the sadhak and [then] disappear. At that time, the sadhak, either through hearing wisdom from a bodiless source, or reading wisdom written in luminous letters in the Kutastha, is able to know the matters that should be known. Or, the absorption becomes so great at that time that the matters to be known spontaneously rise up in the mind. Through these kinds of hearing, seeing and knowing, all doubts are removed; one arrives (known by oneself) at the state of Complete Knowledge. (See later in sloka 39 [of this Chapter 4].) 