#### Prose 

अपर्याप्तं तदस्माकं बलं भीष्माभिरक्षितम् |
पर्याप्तं त्विदमेतेषां बलं भीमाभिरक्षितम् || 10||
aparyāptaṁ tadasmākaṁ balaṁ bhīṣhmābhirakṣhitam
paryāptaṁ tvidameteṣhāṁ balaṁ bhīmābhirakṣhitam

 #### Bengali Translation 

Our soldiers, guarded by Bhishma, are “aparyapta” [beyond [merely being] sufficient, but the soldiers of the Pandavas, guarded by Bhima, are “paryapta” [[merely] sufficient].

 #### Commentary 

The essential meaning from the 3rd to the 10th sloka: Dhristadyumna is Drona's disciple – the meaning of this is: the Light of Consciousness actually revealed via buddhi [intelligence/intellect]. But as soon as the Light of Consciousness is revealed, it tries to extinguish buddhi, which is when active desires rise up in the sadhak's mind to excite the buddhi into relating to worldly matters, and the active desires [Duryodhana] seem to go on to say, “O buddhi! That which you love, and that which is growing because of you, that very Light of Consciousness is ready to destroy you. Do not give it any more of your attention. Destroy it quickly. All of the vrittis – Yuyudhan and such – that are revealed by that Light of Consciousness are all great warriors (whichever [vritti] the mind puts it attention on – that very [vritti] has the power of pulling the mind into a stupor of desire) – meaning: quick and powerful; what to say – they are even as powerful as wind and fire. Therefore, all of them [Pandavas] are nothing at all. Compared to us, they are all insignificant, because on our side – because you are there along with Bhishma, Karna and such, we have the powers of both kshatriyas and brahmins. But for them (in their side) – because they only have the power of kshatriyas, they have no [real] power. Not only that – our side is [nearly] unlimited in quantity. And Bhishma, the one who is the Abhas Chaitanya, the one, let us just say, who almost has no death or extinguishing – it is he who is the protector. And their side is limited [and] very small compared to ours. And their protector is Bhima – meaning: [the element] air, which is ever restless and whose force/power is inconsistent.”
 
But because Bhishma had called Karna “half-a-warrior,” Karna (obligatory/duty-bound actions), filled with anger, vowed that he would not take up weapons as long as Bhishma was fighting in the war. So, with the possibility of obligatory/duty-bound actions being absent from the “war,” there is a reason for Duryodhana to have some fear as well. For this reason, in the next sloka [Duryodhana] tries to arrange for the protection of Bhishma.