#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
असंशयं महाबाहो मनो दुर्निग्रहं चलम् |
अभ्यासेन तु कौन्तेय वैराग्येण च गृह्यते || 35||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
asanśhayaṁ mahā-bāho mano durnigrahaṁ chalam
abhyāsena tu kaunteya vairāgyeṇa cha gṛihyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “O Mahabaho [mighty-armed one; Arjuna]! That the mind is difficult to control and restless – there is no doubt about that. Even so, O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! through practice and detachment, the mind can be controlled.”

 #### Commentary 

The kinds of experiences that one has in Kriyayoga, as stated in slokas 33 and 34 [of this Chapter 6] – that those are right – in order to affirm that to the disciple, the Lord said, “Yes, it is so. The mind is extremely restless and “durnigraha” (very difficult to bring under control). There is not a bit of doubt about this. Nevertheless, it is not uncontrollable. It can be brought under control. The method is nothing but “abhyas” [practice] and “vairagya” [detachment].” It is by abhyas and vairagya that the mind is brought under control. “AbhyAsavairAgyAbhyaṃ tannirodhah” [it is stopped by practice and detachment]. What is “abhyas” [practice] – but this: “tatra sthitau yatno'bhyAsah [to bring it all into settledness is 'abhyas']” - meaning: through the application of “yama” [don'ts], “niyama” [do's], “asana” [seated posture for meditation], “pranayam” [breath regulation] and such, bringing the mind again and again to one-pointedness with care and energy, and making the effort to still oneself is called “abhyas” [practice]. If this abhyas is taken up for a long time with reverence, and in an unbroken way and always, it becomes “dhridha” - meaning: absolutely firm. Then, one can simply concentrate the mind wherever one wishes, just by willing. What is “vairagya” [detachment] – but this: “dṛShTAnushravikaviShayavitṛShNsya vasheekArasaṃgya vairAgyam [withdrawing from the apparent worldly matters and tradition-based matters], having no thirst for them, and bringing the perception under control is called 'vairagya']” - meaning: to have no thirst or no desire for the two “vishayas” [non-spiritual experiences] - “drishta vishaya” [worldly experience] and “anushravik vishaya” [tradition-based experience] – is called “vairagya.” In the condition of being a jiva [individual soul], that which is experienced in this world – that is called “drishta vishaya.” And that which is supposed to be enjoyed after death, according to the statements in the Vedas, due to the fruits of good deeds, such as heaven etc. - that is called “anushravik vishaya.” When this kind of vairagya is born, the difference between Prakriti and Purush is seen. Then one has no desire even for the good qualities of Prakriti. The richness of Prakriti can no longer tempt the sadhak. [Then,] the mind can be stopped without any problem. 