#### Prose 

बृहत्साम तथा साम्नां गायत्री छन्दसामहम् |
मासानां मार्गशीर्षोऽहमृतूनां कुसुमाकर: || 35||
bṛihat-sāma tathā sāmnāṁ gāyatrī chhandasām aham
māsānāṁ mārga-śhīrṣho ’ham ṛitūnāṁ kusumākaraḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among the “sama[s],” I am “Vrihat Sama.” Among “chhanda[s]” [rhythmic poetry] I am “Gayatri [mantra],” Among months, I am “Margasheersha,” and among seasons, I am “Vasanta” [spring]. 

 #### Commentary 

“Sama” refers to one particular Veda among the four Vedas. — Begin Footnote. — The music that is within the Vedas is called “sam[a].” The blessed Vyasadeva [the compiler of the Vedas], at the time of dividing the Vedas into parts, gathered together all of those musical pieces, set them in sequence and created one particular part [of the four parts of the Vedas]. That part is called “Sama Veda.” This is why the musical aspect is predominant in the recitation of the Sama Veda. Listening to the Sama-music, the mind gradually merges and goes into Infinity, and afterwards, crosses past “Shabda-Brahman” [Brahman-Sound/Word]. That is why there is the proverb: “gaanat paratara na hi” [there is nothing beyond Music; or: there is nothing greater than Music]. Following the Vedic example, the word “sam[a]” is also used in Greek and Latin in reference to sacred music. — End Footnote. — In each Veda, there are actually three parts – karma [acts], bhakti [worshipful observance] and jnana [knowledge; realization]. The part in the Sama Veda that is about attaining Liberation – that part’s name is “Vrihat Sama” [the big Sama]. “I” Myself Am Liberation Itself. The attainment is of “I” alone. Thus, “I” am “Vrihat Sama.”
GAyatree [a sacred mantra] – “gAyantaṃ trAyate iti gAyatree” [that, by singing which, one is delivered] – by singing which, one’s coming and going from this world ends. This [Gayatri mantra] is set up with twentyfour syllables using specific light and heavy emphases on the sounds of the letters. That is why it is called “chhanda” [rhythmic poetry]. Among all of the “chhandas,” Gayatri is the greatest. This is because this “chhanda” has such an effect that the singing of the Gayatri mantra makes one attain all knowledge, and one attains Brahman Itself. This does not happen with any other “chhandas.” Thus, “I” am “Gayatri.” Among the months I am “Margasheersha.” The time that the sun is in the “Mrigasheersha” [a star] zone is called the “Margasheersha” month. In the world of people, when the astrological aspects of time were first revealed – meaning: when human beings became aware of “future” and “that which has not yet come” in the movement of time – that is when the divisions of day, week, fortnight, month, year etc. were made. At that time, the first month from which the calculations began – that month is called “Agrahayan” [approximately from mid-November to mid-December in the western solar calendar]. The word “agra” means “first,” and the word “ayan” means “year.” “I” am Knowledge Itself. Because that Knowledge was first revealed in this month of “Agrahayan” or “Margasheersha,” “I” am “Margasheersha” among all of the months that there are. ṚtunAṃ kusumAkarah [among seasons, I am spring] – “kusum” [blossom; flower] is the finest part of a tree. As a simile to the tree, the blossom in the human being is knowledge. Because of the spring season being neither cold nor hot, the trees are full of vital-energy and this fine aspect [blossom; flower] manifests. With this, the trees are further beautified, and the splendrous part of Nature flourishes. And it is also true for human beings. When the body’s energy flourishes, the blossom of knowledge manifests – meaning: because the brain, at this time [spring], is nourished and healthy and facile, the inner journey of sadhana is traversed more easily than in other seasons. For this reason, the spring season is named “kusumakar” [blossoming], and it is for this reason that [spring] is the king of seasons. The subtlest part of substances is the part that is the manifestation of the Consciousness-Self, or the Divine aspect. That manifestation comes forth in this spring season, and thus, the spring season is the Lord’s Divine Manifestation. This is the outer side. Now, for the inner side, when the sadhak, due to the results of pranayam during sadhana, attains settledness in Kutastha, and the inner world becomes beautiful, when mind, in ecstasy, becomes intoxicated in the Inexpressible Bliss – that is the sadhak’s spring season of sadhana. At that time, the sadhak’s Knowledge of the Self flowers. And from that flower, the fruit of SelfRealization comes forth. — Begin Footnote. — This is actually the meaning of the “the coming to being of the six children of Vasudev.” [In this case, “Vasudev” is the name of Sri Krishna’s birth father, not Sri Krishna’s name; the “a” is short in this name, whereas it is long when a similar looking [in the Roman alphabet] name is used for Sri Krishna; furthermore, these six children are from Devaki [Sri Krishna’s birth mother], and not the offspring of Vasudev’s other wives.] For as long as Knowledge/Awareness does not fully manifest, for that long is SelfRealization impermanent – meaning: due to the attraction-power of Maya, the attainment ends after just a short time of having it. This is the meaning of the six sons of Vasudev [Sri Krishna’s father] being destroyed. All of this is part of the progress of elevation in the six chakras – the events of broken samadhi. Later, after crossing the six chakras and rising up to the seventh abode at the Sahasrar, Knowledge/Awareness fully manifests. And then Maya can no longer break the sadhak’s absorption. Therefore, SelfRealization becomes permanent and stays forever. This is the meaning of Vasudev’s seventh and eighth sons [Balarama and Sri Krishna] not being destroyed. — End Footnote. — For all of these reasons, both in the inner and the outer, the spring season is supreme. That is why it has been said, “Among seasons, ‘I’ am the blossoming spring.” 