#### Prose 

येषां त्वन्तगतं पापं जनानां पुण्यकर्मणाम् |
ते द्वन्द्वमोहनिर्मुक्ता भजन्ते मां दृढव्रता: || 28||
yeṣhāṁ tvanta-gataṁ pāpaṁ janānāṁ puṇya-karmaṇām
te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā bhajante māṁ dṛiḍha-vratāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

But those “punyakarmaa” [people who have done virtuous deeds] whose sins have been destroyed – they are free of doubt and misperception. And being firm in their vows, they meditate on Me.

 #### Commentary 

The acts by which the body and mind become pure – those are “punya-karma” [virtuous deeds]. Sattvic food, sattvic behavior, sattvic activities – the body becomes purified by all of these – meaning: a pure and divine energy, devoid of stupor and tiredness, grows and spreads within. And pranayam, pratyahar [withdrawal in a meditative state], dharana [concentration], dhyan [meditation] and samadhi – the mind is purified by all of these. Thus, these things that make the body and mind pure are all “punya-karma.” And those that do “punya-karma” are “punyakarmaa” [doers of “punya-karma”]. When one is “punyakarmaa,” sins are destroyed. The impurities of the body and mind comprise that which is called “sin.” The humors that are comprised primarily of rajas and tamas gunas are the “impurities of the body.” When these impurities are there, the ability to reflect the Light of the Self from Kutastha is diminished. At that time, nothing can be seen with the inner sight. Being addicted to the worldly experience and not being able to be detached are the “impurities of the mind.” The impurities of the mind are adversarial and harmful, because if they are there, then one cannot progress in the path of sadhana at all. When sins are destroyed, one becomes free of doubt and misperception – meaning: one is no longer overcome by the pleasures and pains of the worldly experience. Then no hindrances remain. One becomes firm with the vows. People who have attained this condition meditate upon the Lord – meaning: in Unity, they directly realize the Supreme Self.