#### Prose 

ते तं भुक्त्वा स्वर्गलोकं विशालं
क्षीणे पुण्ये मर्त्यलोकं विशन्ति |
एवं त्रयीधर्ममनुप्रपन्ना
गतागतं कामकामा लभन्ते || 21||
te taṁ bhuktvā swarga-lokaṁ viśhālaṁ
kṣhīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśhanti
evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā
gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante

 #### Bengali Translation 

After experiencing that vast plane of heaven, they return again to the E\earthen-world because of the benefits of past merits coming to an end. If one does religious practices for the sake of the desires for pleasures, one has to go back and forth like this.

 #### Commentary 

“PuNya” [merit/s; non-sin] – “pu” = “p[n]uj” [bundle] = meaning: the excrement- and urine-filled body + “N” = Nirvana — Begin Footnote. — “Nih” = “naasti” [non-existence; annihilation], “vANa” = that which pierces. Without the help of “vayu” [air; vital-air], in no way can anyone pierce anything. For this reason, “vayu” is the piercer. When this “vayu” becomes “nih” – [meaning:] is no longer – meaning: comes to stillness – the name of that state is “Nirvana.” For as long as there is body-identification, for that long is there the activity of “vayu.” The vayu that does not escape outside, yet takes rest in its subtle form in the sky within the body – that rest-taking state is the “Na.” — End Footnote. — [+] “yaṃ” = own self – to leave the excrement- and urine-filled body and abide in one’s Self is “punya” [being sinless] – meaning: when I left the body-vanity [or: body-identification] and became settled in my own Self – it is then that my restlessness came to an end. That devoid-of-restlessness state is that which is called “punya” [sin-free-ness]. Its opposite is that which is called “paap” [sin]. For as long as there is abidance in one’s own Self, for that long is there Infinite-ness or Brahman-ness. It is vast, waveless, limitless. For as long as the sadhak, even in the jiva-level of samadhi, experiences this vast, Brahman-connected pleasure, for that entire time, nothing of the great mutations [worldly experiences] find any place to spring forth in the sadhak. That state comes gradually to an end – meaning: those dormant seeds of samsara begin to take in the juice of samsara due to the breaking of samadhi. And according to the stages of descent, little by little, the body-vanity of the dead world [samsara] begins to come forth and go on doing so. And that state of settledness in the Self becomes reduced and restlessness grows. This stillness and restlessness – these are two levels, or “svarga[s]” [heavens]. Both of these are the play of the tri-guna-endowed Maya. This culminates in “avagaman” – meaning: coming and going. This is because: the wanting to enjoy the paravastha of Kriya after performing Kriya – that is also “kama” [desire].