#### Prose 

तस्मादसक्त: सततं कार्यं कर्म समाचर |
असक्तो ह्याचरन्कर्म परमाप्नोति पूरुष: || 19||
tasmād asaktaḥ satataṁ kāryaṁ karma samāchara
asakto hyācharan karma param āpnoti pūruṣhaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

For that reason (meaning: in order to become Atma-Rama), be unaddicted/unattached and continue doing “karya” [works] and “karma” [rites; acts], because by doing acts while being non-attached (“anaasakta”), the person attains the Supreme Thing.

 #### Commentary 

The ultimate spiritual goal is to become Atma-Rama. In order to be Atma-Rama, the sadhak has to do “karya” [works] and “karma” [yogic acts] in an unattached way. — Begin Footnote. — In sloka 17 [of Chapter 3], “karya” and “karma” have been stated. “Karya” [work] is of the outer; “karma” [act] is of the inner. Karya is physical/material. Karma is subtle. The aim of karya is the worldly experience. The aim of karma is the Self. This is the difference. In the case of the sadhak, the body is properly cultivated via karya – like: sattvic diet, sattvic behavior, cleanliness of body and character etc. The cultivation of the chitta [heart; personal consciousness] is done via karma – like: detachment from the worldly experience, the love for the Self, etc. — End Footnote. — This is because non-attachment is the only way to get Release. It is by doing the non-attached karma [yogic act] that Liberation is attained. — Begin Footnote. —  It can come to the sadhak's mind that: if the teaching is about renouncing attachments/addictions, then why should there even be a desire to be Atma-Rama? That is also an attachment. The answer to this has been given by Srigurudev [God] through the mouth of Ashtavakra [a saint]: “muktimicchati chettAta viShayAn viShavattyaja; kshmArjavadyAtoShasataṃ peeyooShavadbhaja” (Ashtavakra Samhita, Chapter 1, sloka 2); meaning: “if you want Liberation my dear, then abandon “vishaya” [worldly experience] as you would shun “visha” [poison], and endeavor to have forgiveness, sincerity, mercy, contentment and truth.” When one discards the attachment of pravritti [being outer-directed] and desires to have nivritti [withdrawing from the outer], in the end [of this process] all attachment/desire ends and one attains Liberation. But if one is attached/desirous in the direction of pravritti, the attachments do not diminish. They actually grow. Sadhana is also like the principle of “kantakenaiva kantakaṃ” [getting rid of thorns with a thorn] – ending karma [actions and their fruits] through karma [spiritual act]. — End Footnote. —