#### Prose 

सञ्जय उवाच |
इत्यर्जुनं वासुदेवस्तथोक्त्वा
स्वकं रूपं दर्शयामास भूय: |
आश्वासयामास च भीतमेनं
भूत्वा पुन: सौम्यवपुर्महात्मा || 50||
sañjaya uvācha
ity arjunaṁ vāsudevas tathoktvā
svakaṁ rūpaṁ darśhayām āsa bhūyaḥ
āśhvāsayām āsa cha bhītam enaṁ
bhūtvā punaḥ saumya-vapur mahātmā

 #### Bengali Translation 

Saying such to Arjuna, Vasudeva [long first “a”; Sri Krishna] again showed that Form [from before]. The Great Spirit (Sri Bhagavan [the Lord]) took on His Peaceful and Joyful Form and consoled the still afraid Arjuna. 

 #### Commentary 

The word “vasu” [short “a”] means “gem,” such as diamond, emerald, pearl, ruby [etc.] – a thing that is inert, or not inert, within which light emits, yet that light is covered by something firm. “Deva” means “emitting light.” Thus the meaning is: something that is like an inert or non-inert substance from light is being emitted, but that light is seen through a firm yet transparent covering. That which emits light in this way – that is “vasudev” [short “a”]. And “Vasudeva” [long first “a”] means all gods – meaning: where all light-emitting, radiant beings reside together – this kind of place. “Jyotirabhyantare roopaṃ achintyaṃ shyamasundaram” [within the light is the unimaginable Form of the beautiful Dark One [Sri Krishna]]. When the sadhak looks to the upper side of the Ajnana-chakra – at that time, the sadhak sees “Vasudev” [short “a”] right in front. When that “Vasudev” is pierced, right then “Vasudeva” [long first “a”] is seen. Blending with His Own Prakriti and His Self (the Self is Beginning-less and Infinite; Prakriti is with beginning and with limits – the merging of these two) – the sadhak experiences a Form with beginning yet Infinite. There is no limit to this Beautiful Form. That is why the perfected sages have perceived a crown on the Head of this Infinite Form, expressing His Supremeness. That is why He is wearing a crown. Here [in this state] there is no physical aspect whatsoever, but the tanmatras [essences of manifestation] are there. A kind of unbroken sound – like the blending of “a” and “u” together – is experienced, as if it is being heard. That is why the sadhaks have compared it to the sound of a conchshell being blown into, and have stated that that is an aspect. (Investigators have stated that this world is only sound and is actually devoid of matter; matter is only an error in perception.) Whatever there is that has a beginning – that arises from one place, goes about [existing/functioning], and then again goes into repose at the place of its arising. Here too, the place from where experience itself begins, and, after going about in all directions, returns again to that same place and merges back – this aspect has been compared to a “chakra” [turning about; wheel; revolution; the discus in one of the hands of Vishnu]. Even though it is illusory, this creation is exceedingly beautiful to see. It blossoms from the Inexpressible, pretends to be expressible, and then disappears by merging back into the Inexpressible. That is why the poet-sages have compared the immaterial nature of creation as the “Sudarshan Chakra” [meaning: the turning about that is beautiful to see [“Sudarshan Chakra” is the name of the chakra/discus in the four-armed form of Vishnu]]. This Form has immense power to shock/astonish. Because it overwhelms one again and again, the Form is thought of as the experience of being “struck” by Power Itself, and that is why the name “gada” [mace/club] is shown as one of the aspects. There is nothing in the world but shocks. That is why the sages have used the code word “gada” [mace/club] for this aspect. “Padma” [lotus] – the word “pad” means “place”; the sound “ma” means Brahmaa [creator], Vishnu [preserver], Shiva [destroyer], Yama [death], Kaal [time] and Chandra [moon]. The place where all of these [represented by the sound “ma”] reside together – that is “padma.” This creation (it is like the magic show of creation, sustenance, usage, contraction and destruction) is keeping everyone entranced by the effect of its beauty/form. That is why the sages who know the science of phenomena have called this aspect “padma.” It has another name - “Pankaj” [born from dirt] – because it’s [the worldly beauty’s] birth is from dirt. That is why one aspect [of this four-armed Form], showing the visible beauty of creation, is represented by this “padma” [lotus]. These four have been conceived as happening on four sides – meaning: the four arms [of Vishnu]. Thus Vasudeva [the Lord] is pictured holding a conch-shell, discus, club and lotus, and wearing a crown. This means: the One Who is holding this false Maya-filled creation-samsara – He is Vasudeva. The Form of this Vasudeva is extremely mysterious and hidden. The blue that is seen on the sky because of great distance and error in vision, even though space is devoid of form/color – this Divine Form is even more mysterious than that. It is subtler than the subtlest. Whatever is experienced, known, intuited – It is even far away from that, immersed in the deep Unknown. For this reason, It has been given the name “Chikankaala” [Radiant Blackness; epithet of Sri Krishna]. “SAdhakAnAṃ hitArthAya brahmaNo roopakalpanA” [forms of Brahman are conceived for the benefit of the sadhak [aspirant]]. What this means is that there is no form whatsoever here. The experiences [of Divinity] are intense. As the sadhak starts to come down after continuously seeing Divine Visions, a kind of form is created according to those experiences while returning to samsara, relating the feelings that are experienced in Prakriti to the experiences in sadhana. This [Form of] “Vasudeva” is combination of all of those feelings. As mentioned in the earlier slokas, Arjuna was afraid. The Lord gave Arjuna consolation from that fear, and, by showing him that four-armed Form that was seen by the family of Vasudev [short “a”; Sri Krishna’s birth father] and revealing Himself again as the benevolent and beautiful (“totravetraikapANi” [helping-hand] friend), consoled Arjuna. This means: the fearlessness/assurance that the sadhak feels after first progressing in sadhana [spiritual practice] – that fearlessness/assurance turns to fear when one witnesses that Universal State after having progressed enough in sadhana. This is due to the weakness born of samskaras [previous worldly impressions] and attachments dwelling in the heart. But later, as one comes to know the State of Vasudeva [the Lord in pleasing Form], that fear disappears and one becomes reassured. And upon fully surrendering, the sadhak makes that State into a beautiful and benevolent form that can be held onto by his/her human antahkarana [personal consciousness].