#### Prose 

एवं बुद्धे: परं बुद्ध्वा संस्तभ्यात्मानमात्मना |
जहि शत्रुं महाबाहो कामरूपं दुरासदम् || 43||
evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā sanstabhyātmānam ātmanā
jahi śhatruṁ mahā-bāho kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Mahabaho [mighty-armed one; Arjuna]! Having known in this way that the Self is greater than the intellect, via the Self still the mind, intellect and the aggregate of the sense-organs and kill this difficult to conquer enemy known as desire.

 #### Commentary 

Because the intellect is a ground for desire, it becomes distorted through the contact with worldly experiences and the senses. But the Self is free of distortions. It is the witness of all. Therefore, the Self is greater than the intellect. O sadhak! This Self is indeed “you” - meaning: your real being. Having known in this way that you are greater than the intellect, take up the certainty of intellect or the intelligence of the Self – meaning: “I am greater than all and I am free from change; desire cannot touch me; but when I become deluded, that is my confusion; it is like: when, in a game about going around in circles, children go round and round in circles, close their eyes and fall down, and then they see that the world is going round and round – it [the confusion] is only a movement like that and nothing more” - having this kind of steady faith, make the mind still and unmoving. If that happens, then the mind will be “I”-filled. Even though the mind is the mover of desire, desire will not be again able to move about in the mind. Thus, it will come under your power. Then it can be killed. This is the one and only way to be victorious over and destroy desire. That is why desire has been called “durasada” [see last word of sloka 3:43 above] (meaning: it can be brought under one's control with great difficulty). Thus ends the commentary on the third chapter of Sri Pranab Gita - “Karmayoga.”