#### Prose 

आवृतं ज्ञानमेतेन ज्ञानिनो नित्यवैरिणा |
कामरूपेण कौन्तेय दुष्पूरेणानलेन च || 39||
āvṛitaṁ jñānam etena jñānino nitya-vairiṇā
kāma-rūpeṇa kaunteya duṣhpūreṇānalena cha

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! Knowledge remains covered by this eternal enemy to the spiritual person – this desire, the unquenchable fire.

 #### Commentary 

Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower – these three becoming one in union is the Supreme Goal. In this: the knower is the jiva; the object of knowledge is Shiva or Parabrahman. And knowledge is Shakti as well as the Special State [of Being]. It is through knowledge that the object of knowledge can be known. Then, through spiritual enquiry and intuition, it can be known that all is Brahman and Brahman is all. At that time knowledge is Shakti. And when, via the fruit of the performance of Layayoga (when one finds “laya” [dissolution; merging] through yoga), one attains samadhi. As one comes down and returns again to the path of samsara, it is seen that I am verily “I” or Brahman. At that time knowledge is a State of Being. — Begin Footnote. — The first part of this knowledge is “parokshagyana” [indirect, learned knowledge] and the second is “aparokshagyana” [direct, experiential knowledge]. “Asti brahmeti chet veda parokshagyanameva tat; ahaṃ brahmeti chet veda sAkshAtkArah sa uchyate.” Iti panchadashee. [“Brahman is,” is indirect knowledge [learned from some outside source]; the knowledge “I am Brahman” is through direct Realization; thus it is said. From the Panchadashi.]  — End Footnote. — This knowledge has different stages and proportions. According to that, there are also different gradations of “gyani[s]” [knower[s]]. Thus, one who, upon taking the functionality of being inwardly directed, takes care to enquire about the Self – that one is a “gyani.” And again, one who has ascended to the uppermost point of knowledge and has attained the State of Knowledge – that one is also a “gyani.” The difference is that the first one is on the lowest level of the steps, and the second one is in the uppermost level. The one who has crossed passed the Agya and has attained Stillness – that one is jivanmukta [Liberated while alive in the body]. All of that being's coverings have been destroyed. But the one who is below the Agya – because of his/her mind remaining in the pull of the cravings – new kinds (making the old new again) of wishes for enjoyments go on rising up within his/her antahkarana. These desires face one like the masses of curtains. The light of knowledge by which the inner world is seen – they cover up that light. The inner sight does not open up. Even if one disciplines the mind and makes it desireless through detachment, the influence of Prakriti is such that the mind falls to the power of desires, as if it is benumbed. This is why desire is the “eternal enemy.” — Begin Footnote. — For the “agyani” [the ignorant], during the time of enjoying worldly experiences, desire is about pleasure. But when that ends, desire is about pain. For the “gyani” [knowledgeable one; spiritual person], with the exception of the “meaningful work” [spiritual practice], any experience of the world is about pain. The reason is: if the wants of the mind grow, kashmal [see Chapter 2, sloka 2] comes about in the inner sky; the Light of the Self is covered up. Whenever desire attracts the mind of the sadhak, it is immediately the experience of pain. It does not become pleasure. That is why desire is the “eternal enemy” of the gyani. — End Footnote. — And more, it is like fire. Although fire gives light to other things, no receptacle – such as wood – can contain it. And it inflames, burns and destroys the receptacle itself. For as long as the receptacle is there, for that long does the light of the fire exist. When the receptacle is destroyed, the fire also disappears. Masses of things put into the fire do not satisfy the fire; instead, its flames increase and spread and it goes on consuming. In the same way, desire too, takes its own receptacle, the mind, and heats it up, and goes on increasing the connection with the worldly experience. Just as fire goes out when there is no receptacle for it, in the same way, when the worldly experience is cast off, desire also ends. 