#### Prose 

अश्रद्धया हुतं दत्तं तपस्तप्तं कृतं च यत् |
असदित्युच्यते पार्थ न च तत्प्रेत्य नो इह || 28||
aśhraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ tapas taptaṁ kṛitaṁ cha yat
asad ity uchyate pārtha na cha tat pretya no iha

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha [Arjuna]! The fire offerings, charity upon doing yajna [fire-rite], performance of austerities, and whatever else is done with unbelief/irreverence – all of that is considered “asat” [wrongful]. (Therefore,) those acts (because of being with wrong qualities [or: no good qualities]) do not produce fruits either in the hereafter or (because of being impotent) in this world.

 #### Commentary 

O Arjuna! When the oblations, charity and austerity are done with unbelief/irreverence right from the start (like: I do not believe in oblations and yajnas, but because the women in the house desire it, I have to do it – this kind of thinking in the mind) – that is called “asat” [wrongful]. The performance of such asat acts cannot bring forth any beneficence (like trying to make a deaf person happy with beautiful melodies) either here or in the hereafter. — Start Chapter Conclusion — Diet, yajna, austerities and charity – if they are carried out with rajasic and tamasic states of mind, asuric [demonic] states come to the life-force. If they are carried out with sattvic states of mind, the daivic [godly] states come about. In asuric states, one is not able to have the right to knowledge. It is in the godly states that one is able to have the right to knowledge. That is why the Lord bestows this teaching in this seventeenth chapter [of the Bhagavad Gita]: abandon rajasic and tamasic faith, and take up sattva-filled faith. Then you will have the right to spiritual knowledge. — End Chapter Conclusion — 