#### Prose 

यद्यदाचरति श्रेष्ठस्तत्तदेवेतरो जन: |
स यत्प्रमाणं कुरुते लोकस्तदनुवर्तते || 21||
yad yad ācharati śhreṣhṭhas tat tad evetaro janaḥ
sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute lokas tad anuvartate

 #### Bengali Translation 

The kinds of behavior that a great one exhibits – the ordinary beings also follow their ways. Whatever is proved by that great one, the ordinary people take that up as the correct thing.

 #### Commentary 

(It will not do at all to keep even a scintilla of desire in the mind/heart. One has to become completely unattached/unaddicted. If that is so, then how is it possible to bring the lokas [planes] together by keeping a steady attention and doing karma [yogic act] without engaging in any desire? The answer to the question that has risen through this type deduction is that which is being answered in this sloka.) That which takes birth – that is “jana” [being; person; see end of first line of sloka 3:21 above]. Thus, the senses and all of the vrittis [functionalities] of the senses are all “jana.” Among the janas, the highest in the hierarchy is the mind. Whatever the mind decides upon, or in whichever direction it goes, all of the vrittis of the senses do exactly that and go in that direction as well. — Begin Footnote. — Everyone knows that when mind goes to the worldly desires, in order to experience those worldly desires the senses immediately become energized. If fear, sorrow or such [negative] things come to the mind, the senses also become weakened. If mind remains absorbed in the contemplation of the Truth, the senses also remain in an unperturbed state. Moreover, the states of the mind are not the same every day. It can be observed that the thing that is perceived as very endearing and very satisfying today, and can be enjoyed by the senses, tomorrow that very same thing, because of a change in the mind, is no longer appealing to the senses. From this, it can be understood that all vrittis [functionalities] of the senses follow the mind. — End Footnote. — Therefore, if the mind can be taken up progressively from the Muladhar to the Sahasrar and then merged into the Self, then the vrittis from the lower levels will also withdraw, together with the elements, and along with the union of the mind with the Self, they too [the vrittis and the elements], by falling into the Substance of the Self, will become filled with the Self, or become filled with Brahman. This is a natural law. It happens automatically. No effort is necessary. The only effort to be made is that one must do prana-Kriya while being devoid of any attachment – only this.