#### Prose 

जरामरणमोक्षाय मामाश्रित्य यतन्ति ये |
ते ब्रह्म तद्विदु: कृत्स्नमध्यात्मं कर्म चाखिलम् || 29||
jarā-maraṇa-mokṣhāya mām āśhritya yatanti ye
te brahma tadviduḥ kṛitsnam adhyātmaṁ karma chākhilam

 #### Bengali Translation 

Those who take refuge in Me and strive to be emancipated from “jaramaran” [old age and death] – they completely know “Tadbrahman” [“That”-Brahman] “Adhyatma” [Self-Knowledge] and “Karma” [Action]. — Begin Footnote. — The last three bracketed - [ ] - definitions provided in the above paragraph are general meanings of the respective words. These have been provided to make it easier for the reader to follow the text. The spiritual definitions are provided in the commentary to slokas 3 and 4 of Chapter 8 of the Pranab Gita. See footnote 10 later in this Chapter 7 for the same indication. — End Footnote. —

 #### Commentary 

The desperation of the jiva is [can be summed up by] “jaramaran” [old age and death]. The aging frailty of the body is called “jara,” and the way of leaving the body that requires the taking on of another body again is that which is called “maran” [death]. Those who become engaged in the service to the Lord in order to be emancipated from “jaramaran” – it is they who are the “arta-bhakta” [desperate devotees; see the commentary to 7:16]. The “arta-bhakta,” through gradual spiritual ascension, becomes “jijnasu” [enquiring], “artharthi” [seeking divine manifestations] and “jnani” [wise; see commentary to sloka 7:16 for detailed definitions regarding these types of yogis]. That is how the “arta-bhakta” can come to completely know “Tadbrahman” [“That”-Brahman], “Adyatma” [Self-Knowledge] and “Karma” [Action; see footnotes 8 and 10 of this Chapter 7]. Brahman is One and non-dual. However, concerning the matters of the drama of creation, He has three states: “Karyabrahman,” “Shabdabrahman” and “Parambrahman.” “Karyabrahman”: the creation with its living beings. This is that which is called “kshara” [destructible]. “Shabdabrahman”: the Supreme Lord. It is He Who is the Basis for the creation with its living beings – Kutastha “Akshara-Purush” [the Indestructible Person]. Here He is “Saguna” [with attributes]. And the One Who is “Parambrahman” - that Being is beyond “kshara” [destructible] and “Akshara” [Indestructible] – the “Uttama Purush” [Supreme Person/Being]. “Uttama” means: “ut” [above] + “tama” [tamoguna] – meaning: above tamoguna or above Maya – beyond Maya or beyond the gunas. Thus, Parambrahman is “Nirguna” [without attributes]. There is no “upasana” [see commentary to 7:1] of Nirguna. The realization of [or: the transformation to] Nirguna is through the upasana of Saguna. That is why the Lord is saying [in this sloka]: it is by taking refuge in Me – meaning: Saguna Indestructible Brahman Supreme Self – that the jiva becomes omniscient, is able to know “Adhyatma,” “Karma” [see footnotes 8 and 10 of this Chapter 7] – everything – and thus attains the Nirguna Brahman-ness. — Begin Footnote. — That only “Akshara [Indestructible] Brahman” can be taken as the refuge and that neither “Kshara [destructible] Brahman” nor “Paramabrahman” can be the refuge – that can be shown via a simile. It is like this. Among the three states of water – ice, liquid and vapor – only the liquid state is that which is life-giving to the jiva; life comes forth by that. The ice [or solid state] causes blocks for the life forms. And the vaporous state [by itself] is beyond grasping. But it is indeed from the liquid state that the knowledgeable ones, through the power of knowledge, can bring about the solid or vaporous states as they wish. In just the same way, “Karyabrahman” [see commentary to sloka 7:29 above] is the jiva’s bondage and “Parambrahman” is beyond sadhana. It is “Shabdabrahman” [see commentary to sloka 7:29 above] that is the Desired One. He is the Mantra Itself. If one is able to take recourse in Him with one-pointed mind, He reveals Himself in the Supremely Captivating Fullness of Consciousness. Then one becomes omniscient and omnipotent, and can be everywhere according to wish, and merges into Parambrahman.  — End Footnote. —