#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
परं भूय: प्रवक्ष्यामि ज्ञानानां ज्ञानमुत्तमम् |
यज्ज्ञात्वा मुनय: सर्वे परां सिद्धिमितो गता: || 1||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣhyāmi jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam
yaj jñātvā munayaḥ sarve parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “I will again speak the knowledge that is the best and supreme among all knowledge, knowing which, all “munis” [sages; see further explanation in commentary below] go from here (from the bondage to the body) to the Abode of Liberation.”  

 #### Commentary 

In the previous chapter [Chapter 13 of the Bhagavad Gita], it was stated that all things that emerge come forth from the union of the field and the knower of the field. That the union of the field and the knower of the field does not happen on its own, but happens by Will of God – to show that, the Lord began this chapter [Chapter 14 of the Bhagavad Gita] by saying, “paraṃ bhooyah pravakshyAmi” [I shall [further] declare the highest] etc. In the 22nd sloka of the previous chapter, it was said that being situated in Prakriti and the association with the gunas [primal qualities] comprise the cause of samsara. Now the question is: what kinds of associations are made to the gunas, and to which of them? What are “gunas” anyway? And how do they bind one? How can one be Liberated from all of the gunas? And what are the signs of the [spiritually] Emancipated person? The knowledge of all of these matters is that which is the “best and supreme” knowledge. That is what has been spoken about in this chapter. It is by knowing that supreme knowledge that the “munis” [sages] (those whose “manovrittis” [mental waves] have completely merged [in the Self] – them) have attained the highest perfection – meaning: after which there is no more spiritual practice or fruits of spiritual practice – those who have attained that supreme state beyond the destruction of body-vanity/body-identification [are “munis”]. And those who do know [such knowledge] – they experience “jivanmuktatva” [the state of being Free while still carrying on life in the body] before they leave the body [before physical death], and afterwards, they merge in Brahman.