#### Prose 

महाभूतान्यङ्ककारो बुद्धिरव्यक्त मेव च |
इन्द्रियाणि दशैकं च पञ्च चेन्द्रियगोचरा: || 6||
mahā-bhūtāny ahankāro buddhir avyaktam eva cha
indriyāṇi daśhaikaṁ cha pañcha chendriya-gocharāḥ

इच्छा द्वेष: सुखं दु:खं सङ्घातश्चेतना धृति: |
एतत्क्षेत्रं समासेन सविकारमुदाहृतम् || 7||
ichchhā dveṣhaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ saṅghātaśh chetanā dhṛitiḥ
etat kṣhetraṁ samāsena sa-vikāram udāhṛitam

 #### Bengali Translation 

All of the five “mahabhootas,” “ahamkar,” “buddhi,” “Avyakta,” the ten “indriyas,” “and one more,” and the five objects of the senses, “icchha,” “dvesha,” “sukha,” “duhkha,” “samghaat” (body), “chetana” and “dhriti” – this is a summarized description of the mutation-oriented “kshetra.”

 #### Commentary 

From the Brahman-refuged tri-guna-endowed Maya arises space, from space [emerges] air, from air [emerges] fire, from fire [emerges] water, from water [emerges] earth. These five are the “mahabootas” [primal elements]. What this means is that these are the unformed subtle elements that permeate all manifestations (like ghee within milk); the elements in the state prior to “panchikaran” [manifestation process of the elements; see commentary to sloka 13:2 of the Pranab Gita], the elements that are in their original, non-mutated state, the elements that are not [in this state] perceivable/graspable by the sense-organs – those are called the “mahabootas,” verily. The antahkarana [four-sectioned operating group of personal consciousness] is formed by the sattvic part of the aggregate of those elements. Through the differences in their vrittis [functionalities], that one antahkarana can be perceived as having four aspects. For volition and non-volition, [there is “manas” [mind]];4 for ascertainment and confirmation, there is “buddhi” [intellect]; for self-oriented identifications – meaning: “I” – “I am like this,” “I am like that” – when this type of vritti [active tendency] is taken up, there is “ahamkar” [ego], and the rumination (contemplation) of that which is done [or: to be done] is [performed by] “chitta” [personal consciousness]. “Avyakta” is Maya, endowed with sattva, rajas and tamas gunas. That which cannot be expressed by speech – that is that which is called “Avyakta” [inexpressible; unexpressed]. The ten “indriyas” [sense-organs] are: the five organs of perception and the five organs of action. “And one more” is mind [as a whole]. These are referred to as the eleven “indriyas” [sense-organs]. The five “perceivables” of the senses are: sound, touch, the visible, taste, and scent. The perceivable of the auditory sense is sound; for the somatosensory sense, it is touch; for the eyes, it is form; for the gustatory sense, it is taste; and for the olfactory sense, it is scent.

“Icchha” [desire] – attachment/addiction for [something]; it is the [wish] for the company of something/someone other than me. It is like: the satisfaction that comes from drinking sugared lime-juice sitting while under a banyan tree in the desert-like heat – and then when the same situation happens again, the wistfulness of remembering that previous time, or wanting that same satisfaction from the same thing at that time – that is that which is called “icchha” [want; desire].
 
“Dvesha” [repulsion; hate] – after finding oneself in a jungle of thorny bushes in a dark night, and then, after suffering greatly, finding relief by God’s Grace – the inner feeling that rises up when the memory of that event and state comes about – that is that which is called “dvesha” [repulsion; hate].
 
“Sukha” [pleasing state] – the attainment of something that is supportive. “Duhkha” [painful/sorrowful state] – the attainment of something that is not supportive. (The state that the mind takes on after “sukha” [pleasure] changes into its next phase is called “duhkha” [dissatisfaction; pain; sorrow].)
 
“Samghaat” [organic whole] – unperturbed union – meaning: the union of the atoms and particles have brought about such a state that there is no perception of even a perforation of separation in them in any way. Being like this is called “samghaat.” It is like this: the way that the innumerable atoms and particles are built together – it is as if there is nothing but oneness in this aggregate and there is no doubt that arises that these are not one – oneness like that. This delusion that makes one think that this evident unreality is the Real – this is that which is called “samghaat.”
 
“Chetana” [operating consciousness] – like iron, even though it is by nature dark, hard and cold, becomes pliant, bright and burning hot by the intense application of fire, and just as this is not the actual nature or way of iron – similarly, when Consciousness comes into the impermanent, non-substantial things such as the sense-organs of the body, the consciousness-like activities that are seen – that is that which is called “chetana” [operating consciousness].
 
“Dhriti” = the power of firm holding. The power that allows one to not break off [of an activity or process] because of weariness [physical or mental]. These attributes such as “icchha” etc. are perceivable/visible. Therefore, they are not of the dharma of the Self. They are of the dharma of mind. Therefore, they are the aspects of “kshetra” [see following paragraph].
 
All of these are mutations/mutable. And these mutations, with their presence making up this world and [other] worlds – this is that which is called “kshetra” [field]. Thus is the summarized exemplification (description) of “kshetra.”