#### Prose 

इति ते ज्ञानमाख्यातं गुह्याद्गुह्यतरं मया |
विमृश्यैतदशेषेण यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु || 63||
iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ guhyād guhyataraṁ mayā
vimṛiśhyaitad aśheṣheṇa yathechchhasi tathā kuru

 #### Bengali Translation 

 I now gave you the teaching on the knowledge that is deeper than the deepest secret. Upon contemplating this fully, do as you please. 

 #### Commentary 

What has been said about the jiva being an instrument of Prakriti, an instrument of one’s own nature, an instrument of God, and having free will – that is an extremely secret knowledge, because, unless that state is attained through [spiritual] work, the truth of it is not experienced. The understanding from spoken words remains in the realm of concept/imagination. There is no use in it. That is why the Lord is saying, “This knowledge that is deeper than the deepest secret (a teaching that is above even the level of the chitta [personal consciousness [the highest point in the antahkarana]]) – I have now told you. Reflecting on this again and again, when resolve comes into being [alternate translation: when you have reached the culmination of spiritual attainment] – whatever desire rises up in you (there will not be any arising of desire at all), do that.” This means: go above the Ajna, reflect on this matter of jiva, Ishvara and Maya, and as you get to the final border, through the power of Self-Knowledge, you will see that for as long as the current of desire runs with the matters of Prakritic worldly experience – for that long does one absolutely have to go round and round in the bondage of karma [actions and their fruits] due to ignorance. But if that current of desire, through recourse in Prakriti, is thrown into Ishvara [alternate translation: if that current of desire is thrown into Ishvara, Who is the refuge of Prakriti], all karma is destroyed through experiencing them, and no bondage remains. The Peace-filled State of Ishvara or the State of Emancipation is attained. From the fruits of reflecting [on the aforementioned matter], as soon as this knowledge is directly realized, the current of desires is offered into Ishvara [spontaneously/automatically]. At that time, “svakarmaNA tamabhyarchya siddhiṃ vindati mAnavah” [worshipping while carrying out one’s own karma [duty], the human being comes to know perfection] – other than a desire that follows this statement, no other desire happens. Who, after directly seeing [the Truth], willingly prays to be bound? That is why the Lord is saying, “After much reflection, whatever you wish – do that.”