#### Prose 

ध्यायतो विषयान्पुंस: सङ्गस्तेषूपजायते |
सङ्गात्सञ्जायते काम: कामात्क्रोधोऽभिजायते || 62||
dhyāyato viṣhayān puṁsaḥ saṅgas teṣhūpajāyate
saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate

क्रोधाद्भवति सम्मोह: सम्मोहात्स्मृतिविभ्रम: |
स्मृतिभ्रंशाद् बुद्धिनाशो बुद्धिनाशात्प्रणश्यति || 63||
krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ sammohāt smṛiti-vibhramaḥ
smṛiti-bhranśhād buddhi-nāśho buddhi-nāśhāt praṇaśhyati

 #### Bengali Translation 

If a person contemplates on worldly things, attachment/addiction is born for those things. From attachment/addiction, “kama” [lust; craving] arises, and from kama, anger comes in to being. From anger, one becomes enjoined to delusion. From delusion, memory is lost/corrupted. From the loss/corruption of memory, the intellect is destroyed. From the destruction of the intellect, life is destroyed (death).

 #### Commentary 

Whether one controls the senses, or whatever it is that one does, if the mind is not made “matpara” [intent on the Self] and is [instead] made “vishayapara” [intent on worldly things] — Begin Footnote. — This is that which is called “mithyachar” [cultivation of the false]. See the sloka 6 of Chapter 3 [of the Gita]. — End Footnote. — – meaning: one takes up the matters of sound and touch and such [matters of the senses], then the mind will mix together with the worldly experiences, like milk with water (but if the mind is “matpara,” it is like butter with water, and cannot mix with the worldly experiences). From that mixing together or being enjoined [to worldly experiences], “kama” [lust; craving] – meaning: the desire to obtain/possess – becomes strong. This “expectation” form of desire is full of illusion. [It is like:] one has received so much wealth that one cannot carry it, yet there is still the desire that there should be more wealth. It is like: the fulfillment of desires has happened to a degree that the mind could not even previously imagine, but still the craving is not satisfied – this is, verily, Maya. It is from this unresolved craving that anger rises forth. The rising up of anger means that delusion has to come about – meaning: no discrimination remains regarding what should and should not be done. With the enjoinment to delusion, memory becomes corrupted – meaning: forgetting the “I” that is beyond the physical-subtle-causal bodies and imperceptible through words and mind, one has to succumb to the bindings of “me and mine” because of feeling that one is the impermanent body and such. When one falls into this delusion, the intellect is destroyed – meaning: the functional certainty of “I am the 'I'” - meaning: the steady faith [in the Self] is destroyed and the doubting functionalities come about. It is through this type of faithlessness and doubt that destruction – meaning: death – happens. This is because: at “prayankal” (the time of leaving one's body), the faithless and doubtful soul's mind (intellect), because it is not firm in the Self, goes on remembering the matters of the world, which becomes/is the seed of taking on a body once again. — Begin Footnote. — See the commentary on sloka 27 [of this Chapter 2].  — End Footnote. — 