#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
कथं भीष्ममहं सङ्ख्ये द्रोणं च मधुसूदन |
इषुभि: प्रतियोत्स्यामि पूजार्हावरिसूदन || 4||
arjuna uvācha
kathaṁ bhīṣhmam ahaṁ sankhye droṇaṁ cha madhusūdana
iṣhubhiḥ pratiyotsyāmi pūjārhāvari-sūdana

 #### Bengali Translation 

[Arjuna said:] O enemy-destroying Madhusudan! How can I employ my arrows and weapons and fight this war against the venerable Bhishma and Drona?

 #### Commentary 

There are two powers that are continuously working in the body of the jiva. One is “Nara” [human]; the other is “Narayana” [Divine]. Nara, abiding in the Muladhar, is trying to absorb the consciousness-substance in the worldliness-oriented “ignorance-natured tamoguna,” and Narayana, abiding in the Sahasrar, is trying to bring the consciousness-substance into the “knowledge-natured tamoguna,” and preside over [the consciousness-substance]. The result of this “trying” – meaning: the aggregate of these two powers' strengths together – is the “jiva-bhava” [jiva-condition; jiva-ness] or “jivatva” [jiva-ness]. Just as the consciousness-substance – meaning: mind – is helpless to the pulls of those two powers – similarly, prana is also helpless – one time within, another time outside, going round and round like a weaver's spinning wheel. Mind – subtle and free; prana – physical and enslaved; mind – the living-ness; prana – life being lived;  the difference between [mind and prana] is only this much. That Nara-Narayana is also called “Maya-Brahman” or “Mayic Shakti” or “Brahmi-shakti.” Just as soon as one tries to leave Maya and go to Brahman, right away Maya starts pulling [on the jiva]. At that time, mind – like the swing of life [alternate meaning: like the swinging of prana] – goes on swinging between Maya and Brahman – meaning: at one time rises up through the strength of Self-Awareness, and then again comes down because of the errors of world-awareness. In Self-Awareness - “It is I Who is the presence of all and it is from Me that everything is present” - this type of state of Independence comes about. In the world-awareness - “you are the all-knowing guru; I am the ignorant disciple” - this type of enslaved state comes about. These two states are what are called, respectively, “Atma-bhava” and “jiva-bhava.” The doubt and conflict of the jiva-bhava finds resolution in Atma-bhava. This discussion between Arjuna and Sri Krishna is actually the jiva-bhava and Atma-bhava – doubt/conflict and resolution [respectively]. These two are only different states of the same being. I am the one who understands; I am the One Who makes me understand. Succumbing to the pull of Maya is [the state of] Arjuna, not succumbing is Bhagavan [Lord]. In the chamber of the Self in the path of sadhana, it is this that is realized directly.
 
Dear sadhak, now you understand – what the [real] meaning of “arjuna uvAcha” [Arjuna said] and “sribhagavAnuvAcha” [the Lord said] is.
 
“SAṃkhya”: “Saṃ” = whole; “kha” = space; “ya” = vehicle; “a” = settledness – meaning: casting off the “I am the body” idea, settling wholly in the vehicle of space (in “chidakash” [the space of consciousness]). The teaching in Ashtavakra Samhita - “yadi dehaṃ pṛthaka kṛtya chiti vishrAmya tiShThasi” [if, knowing that you are distinct from the body, you establish yourself in a state of resting in consciousness] is exemplified by this word [saṃkhya]. The complete sloka [from Ashtavakra Samhita] associated with this teaching has been translated in Bengali [and explained] in a footnote in the 9th sloka of Chapter 3 in this Gita. One will be able to understand the essential meaning [of that sloka and this teaching] by reading that [section].
 
“IShubhih”: If the Atma-mantra and “hangsa” are united together, prana becomes extremely subtle and intensely quickened. That is what is called “iShu” or “baan” [arrow] (a thing that pierces). It is by the progressive and regular striking of that subtle prana that all of the inner coverings are pierced [or: cut asunder].
 
The sadhak (Arjuna) has readied him/herself to destroy the seed of samsara, but, because of true knowledge being covered up due to Mayic confusion, many doubts are coming up for him/her. So, [the sadhak] is looking to the Atma-bhava Madhusudan and thinking, “Being separated from the body, and merging the mind into the space-equilibrium, how will I be able to strike with the breath by driving the subtle prana and thus kill the mind? This means: [how will I destroy] the “I-ness” (Bhishma) of the mind and the mind-driven intellect (Drona)? At that time the power to do “'mantra' ut-charan” [ordinary meaning: pronunciation of mantra; the meaning here: to ride the mantra above] becomes contracted; how would it be possible [at that time] to draw prana? And more, it is through this “I-ness” that I grow, and it is through this [samsaric] intellect that I get my greater awareness, or revelations. Through the power of this “I-ness” I have made the universe “I”-filled, and through the power of the Prakritic intellect, I have ascertained the knowledge of substances and have become learned in the sciences and have become a receiver of revelations. For these reasons, these two [“I-ness” and the samskaric intellect] are actually worthy of worship. They are certainly not things to be destroyed.” This kind of delusion is coming about.
