#### Prose 

पूर्वाभ्यासेन तेनैव ह्रियते ह्यवशोऽपि स: |
जिज्ञासुरपि योगस्य शब्दब्रह्मातिवर्तते || 44||
pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva hriyate hyavaśho ’pi saḥ
jijñāsur api yogasya śhabda-brahmātivartate

 #### Bengali Translation 

For this reason, that yogi, even if his/her own will is not cooperating (even if the yogi is unwilling) becomes drawn [to Self-Realization] by that previous practice [in the previous life]. And as soon as he/she begins to enquire about the Truth associated with yoga, that yogi goes beyond the Shabdabrahman [sound of Brahman] [ordinary meaning: “goes beyond the Vedas and such”; see commentary for spiritual/yogic meaning]. 

 #### Commentary 

The fallen yogi, in order to attain perfection, takes greater care to practice [in this life] than in the previous life. The reason is this: he/she is driven by the strong force of the spiritual tendencies born of yogic practice in the previous life. Even if that yogi is unwilling – meaning: does not have the desire to attain Realization from yoga due to the rising up in the mind of tendencies that bring about the desire to enjoy the worldly experience – even if that happens, the spiritual tendencies born of previously done [spiritual] yoga are so strong that the yogi is forced to endeavor in yoga. The yoga-created spiritual tendencies can be covered up for some time by other tendencies, but the spiritual tendencies eventually destroy these other tendencies and their own active principles become dominant instead. The tendencies born of yogic practice do not get destroyed. This is the usual process. But the one who is “yogat chalitamanasah” [whose mind has moved away from yoga [due to psychic delusion and not from self-will]] – meaning: the fallen yogi of the second type – that yogi does not again have to be stalled by the rising up of other tendencies [they do not happen, or they are not very strong]. That yogi only operates via – meaning: is drawn by – the tendencies born of the yogic practice in the previous life and [right away] becomes an enquirer [of spirituality] – meaning: that yogi endeavors in yoga so that he/she may know the yogic Truth. And without effort, that yogi, due to the benefits of the practice in the previous life, crosses beyond Shabdabrahman [sound of Brahman], or the Vedas – meaning: that yogi directly goes and merges the mind into the Light within the Sound and becomes settled in Supreme Vishnu-Being. The Unstruck Sound or the Pranava-Naad is verily “adi” [primordial]. It is from That Sound that, according to the sequential manifestations of karmas [acts] that take place in the seven chakras such as Sahasrar etc., the Vedas – Atharva, Sama, Yaju and Rik – come forth. (See the commentary in Chapter 2, sloka 45 [of the Pranab Gita].) It is for this reason that these [Vedas] are called “Shabdabrahman” [sound of Brahman]. — Begin Footnote. — When the four Vedas such as Rik manifest their active principles in the seven heavens such as Muladhar etc. - it is then that the body comes into being. The body is called “karya-Brahman” [work of Brahman; Brahman-work]. Karya-Brahman – Karma-Shabdabrahman – gyana. — End Footnote. —