#### Prose 

य: शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य वर्तते कामकारत: |
न स सिद्धिमवाप्नोति न सुखं न परां गतिम् || 23||
yaḥ śhāstra-vidhim utsṛijya vartate kāma-kārataḥ
na sa siddhim avāpnoti na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim

 #### Bengali Translation 

One who abandons scriptural injunctions and does things [or: performs rites] according to one’s own whim – that one does not attain perfection, nor does that one attain happiness, nor does that one attain the Supreme Destination.

 #### Commentary 

“Shastra” [scripture] means “the Vedas.” And “vidhi” [method] means “practice.” Religious work according to the procedures written in the Vedas, or practices [according to the Vedas] are called “shastravidhi” [according to the scriptural injunctions]. The knowledge of the seven stopping-places from the Muladhar to the Sahasrar – going upward: bhuh, bhuvah, svah mahah, janah, tapah, satyam – is called “Veda” [knowledge] (see commentary to Chapter 2, sloka 45 [of the Pranab Gita]). This Veda, or knowledge, brings about the upliftment of individual souls. Thus, the meaning of “shastravidhi” is: the method in the Vedas related to the upliftment of souls. Because the Vedas were recited by the mouth of [the creator] Brahmaa, the words of Brahmaa are known as “shastra” [scripture]. The creator Brahmaa comes into view from the Muladhar lotus to the sadhak’s [inner] eye. Right after creation, along with yajna [fire ceremony] [alternate translation: using “sahaj yajna” [natural/easy yajna]], his first directive to the living beings is: “devAn bhAvayatAnena te devA bhAvantu vah parasparaṃ bhAvayantah shreyah paramavApsyatha iShTAn bhogAn hi vo devA dAsyante yajnabhAvitAh tairdattAnapradAyebhyo yo bhungktestena eva sah” – [these are] slokas 11 and 12 of Chapter 3 [of the Bhagavad Gita]. This statement speaks about the “sahaj yajna” [natural or easy spiritual act] to be done by the jiva [individual]. This sahaj yajna – meaning: pranayam Kriya – has been explained in the commentary to those slokas [in the Pranab Gita]. This teaching is the method that is related to the upliftment of the soul. This is indeed according to scriptural injunctions.
 
The word “shastravidhi” has another meaning. That which rules/commands – that is that which is called “shastra” [commandments]. The governor that rules/commands within this body is “vayu” [vital-air]. It is because of vayu that the operations of the body are taking place. If vayu is a little bit “here and there” [not in a right way], the body does not remain. Thus, in the body, vayu is “shastra” [that which is the commander]. In the form of the life-force, vayu is sustaining the “jivan” [life] of the “jiva” [living being]. When this vayu’s Kriya is performed, upon it becoming equalized and subtle, it bestows knowledge to the jiva; it bestows Brahman-ness. And when this vayu is distorted, it makes the jiva mad – makes the jiva an insect of samsara.*2 Thus, if one is able to bring this vayu that is the ruler of the body under one’s control, the upliftment of the jiva’s soul happens. That is why, the methods that are there related to this vayu-Kriya – that is that which is called “shastravidhi” [an act according to scriptural injunctions]. This discipline is nothing but that directive of Brahmaa. Thus, whatever the meaning of “shastravidhi” may be, the result is the same. “Sahayajna” [yajna with; or: if seen as “sahaj-yajna” - natural/easy yajna], or the method of prana-Kriya is “shastravidhi” [according to the ruler; according to the scriptures]. This is the directive that flowed from the mouth of Brahmaa.

— Begin Footnote. — The human being, simply by being, is bound to “jaai” [“going-ness”] As one’s “jaai” (vayu [vital-air]) is – one performs actions according to that. Some people have the “jaai” to become sages; some have the “jaai” to become maleficent – and such types etc. This “jaai” is that which is called the tendency of mind, or pravritti [outward going tendencies]. — End Footnote. —

Because the Vedas are [still] of the matters of the three gunas, the Lord bestowed the teaching to Arjuna to go beyond the three gunas (see Chapter 2, sloka 45 [of the Bhagavad Gita]). [However,] in that teaching, the Lord did not say that one should ignore the injunctions of the Vedas. Vedic injunctions provide the only way to be beyond the three gunas. Just as light is the only way to see a desired thing in a dark room – similarly, the only way to be beyond the three gunas is through [following the] Vedic injunctions. Thus, one who abandons the injunctions of the scriptures and carries out the mentioned actions according to his/her own wishes – that one is deluded. That being’s accomplishments, happiness, Supreme Destination – none of that is attained. The Kriya of the six chakras is that which is called “Karmakanda” [section on spiritual acts] in the Vedas, and the Kriya of the Sahasrar is that which is called “Jnanakanda” [section on knowledge in the Vedas]. Unless one goes beyond these two parts/sections via sadhana [spiritual practice], one cannot attain the Non-tri-guna Substance beyond the three gunas. “One cannot eat grass by jumping over the horse” [Bengali colloquialism – meaning: one cannot secure the desired thing by avoiding that which has to be done].
 
In Chapter 3, slokas 11 and 12 [of the Bhagavad Gita], the method of prana-Kriya has been stated. Here, it is enough to say this much in summarized form: that at the time of drawing air in the body – meaning: at the time of inhalation, taking in fresh air from the space outside through the nasal passages and the cavity of the throat in the path of air to the Muladhar – by taking that vayu in the path of the chitta [personal consciousness] according to the teachings of guru, being vigilant to all of the shaktis, and then merging Param Shiva with Kulakundalini, and then exhaling in the opposite operation and re-establishing that vayu in the space outside is that which is called “shastravihita karma” [act according to the directives of scriptures]. The collective count, during the day and night, of this activity is 21,600 times. Those who disregard this activity that is injunction-perfected, and thereby take recourse in the forces of lust and such, and do whatever they want regarding the methods of the rites and abuse inhalation and exhalation – they do not get spiritual realization (the attainment of attainments), happiness (the Bliss of Brahman), or the Supreme Destiny (merging with Brahman) – none of that.