#### Prose 

कर्मणैव हि संसिद्धिमास्थिता जनकादय: |
लोकसंग्रहमेवापि सम्पश्यन्कर्तुमर्हसि || 20||
karmaṇaiva hi sansiddhim āsthitā janakādayaḥ
loka-saṅgraham evāpi sampaśhyan kartum arhasi

 #### Bengali Translation 

Janaka [a saint-king who was the father of Sita, the pure wife of Lord Rama] and such beings attained perfection via karma [action] itself. You should perform action while keeping your sight on the gathering of the “lokas” [planes of existence; or: people].  -20-

 #### Commentary 

The one who gives “janma” [birth] is the one who is “Janaka.” And the one who drives the plough of pranayam and such, digging into the field of the body, and eventually attains the fruit of the pure consciousness of Sita [wife of Lord Rama] – that person is also “Janaka” - meaning: the yogi in union. The meaning of “janakAdayah” [Janaka and such; see sloka 3:20 above] is: the sadhaks of the past – those who attained the pure consciousness – it is through karma [yogic act] that they attained perfection – meaning: establishment in Brahman. That is why karma [yogic act] is imperative. How is that karma to be performed? That is why Srigurudev [Sri Krishna] is saying that - “loka” - meaning: the gathering of everything in the seven planes from the Bhuloka [earth plane] to the Satyaloka [plane of Truth] – meaning: that by which the Bhuloka, located in the Muladhar, gathers itself and merges with Bhuvarloka at the Svadhisthan, then Bhuvah gathers itself and [merges with] Svarloka at the Manipur, Svah into Maharloka at the Anahata, Mahah into the Janaloka at the Vishuddha, Janah into the Tapoloka at the Agya, and Tapah into the Satyaloka at the Sahasrar – continuously going on merging in Layayoga [yoga of merging] in this way – it all ends at the One and Only True Brahman. One has to keep one's sight in that direction and do karma [yogic act] with great care. — Begin Footnote. —  Only by pranayam is the attention steadied enough to be able to “gather” the lokas [planes] in that way. (See the forthcoming sloka 25 [of Chapter 3].) The ways of keeping attention and performing Kriya – the first stages of that has to be learned from guru's teachings; later, through Kriyayoga, one gets to gradually know all, through one's own personal experience. — End Footnote.