#### Prose 

भवान्भीष्मश्च कर्णश्च कृपश्च समितिञ्जय: |
अश्वत्थामा विकर्णश्च सौमदत्तिस्तथैव च || 8||
bhavānbhīṣhmaśhcha karṇaśhcha kṛipaśhcha samitiñjayaḥ
aśhvatthāmā vikarṇaśhcha saumadattis tathaiva cha

अन्ये च बहव: शूरा मदर्थे त्यक्तजीविता: |
नानाशस्त्रप्रहरणा: सर्वे युद्धविशारदा: || 9||
anye cha bahavaḥ śhūrā madarthe tyaktajīvitāḥ
nānā-śhastra-praharaṇāḥ sarve yuddha-viśhāradāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Our Bhishma, Karna, [along with] Kripa – who is victorious in war, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, Saumadatti, Jayadratha and other heroic ones in great numbers are also present; all of whom are ready to die for me. [There are] many kinds of warriors [present] who are highly skilled in war, wielding weapons of missile types and [weapons for] close range fighting.

 #### Commentary 

The spiritual meanings of these names are as follows: 1) Bhavan = Drona. One whose vision is only through one eye, even though he has two [functioning] eyes. One who, when he sees one perspective, cannot see in another way – like a crow. This means: the [type of] intellect that is bound by samskaras. (Although being able to see all sides, yet looking towards the direction of only one side – this intellect is not pure.) The intellect that wants to look only towards Brahman – only that [intellect] is pure. This is why Pandu is the pure intellect, exemplified by Pandu's abandoning the partaking of the worldly things of his kingdom and his exclusive endeavor of worshiping God. [But] this pure intellect is a bondage to the jiva as well. That is why, in order to extinguish this [bondage of pure intellect], the sadhak has to engage in a little bit of [spiritual] addiction. Just as soon as this [spiritual] addiction rises up, the pure intellect immediately disappears. This is the meaning of “Pandu's death being caused by becoming attached to Madri.” 2) Bhishma = Abhas Chaitanya [reflected consciousness], or “Asmita” [egoism]. This means: the ego/I-ness from ignorance. 3) Karna = duty-bound/obligatory work, or passion. 4) Kripa = imagining, or ignorance. Thinking of the Eternal, the pure, happiness and self-ness ([this time erroneously as] me and mine) superimposed on the impermanent, impure, sorrow and substances of non-self-ness is called “Avidya” [ignorance]. Thus, Avidya's aim is the eternal, the pure, and the Self-substance. Due to delusion or erroneous perception, it thinks that the impermanent and such are [actually] the eternal and such. If that confusion is dispelled, it can ascertain the impermanent as impermanent, and then it abandons the impermanent and grasps onto the Eternal. Then that ignorance or confusion in Avidya  becomes transformed to Knowledge. That Knowledge is never destroyed. That is why, according to history, Kripa took the side of the Kauravas, or the path of “bhoga” [external enjoyments], due to being under the power of delusion. But at the end of the war, as the bhogas were finished, his delusion was dispelled, and he went over to the side of the Pandavas, or the path of “yoga” [spirituality]. Yudhishthira engaged him as the martial arts guru of Parikshit. [Kripa] became one of the seven immortals. 5) Ashvatthama = the conglomerate of the quartet of fieriness, control, lust and anger, or “karmaphala” [the fruits of actions]. One person's karmic fruits have to be suffered by two or three generations,  particularly the good and bad of the grandfather – it goes to the grandson. The meaning of “the effort by Ashvatthama to kill Parikshit” is this. This is the torrent of the endless fruits of karma taking place in samsara. In the path of pravritti, there is no end to that torrent. That is why Ashvatthama is one of the immortals.
 
“ashvatthama baleervyasa hanumanta vibheeShaNah
kṛpah parashurAmashcha saptaite chirajeevinah”
 
[Ashvatthama, Bali, Vyasa, Hanuman, Vibhishan, Kripa and Parashurama are the seven immortals]
 
6) Vikarna = undutiful/useless work, or hatred/repulsion. He is a close brother of Duryodhana. 7) Saumadatti (Bhurishrava: bhuri shravati yah sah [one who listens to words about things that fill up]) = karma or samsara. The vritti [active aspect of general consciousness] that, because of being under the power of desires, goes on listening continuously to words of worldly partakings and does not let the mind be concentrated. That is Bhurishrava. Right upon sitting down for sadhana, the sadhak sees so many long-forgotten things of the past, and so many types of endeavors come to his/her mind. That is the work of this vritti. 8) Jayadhratha = clinging to bodily life, or fear of death. Historically, he is the husband of Duryodhana's sister, and is the king of the land of Sindhu. Because he had abducted Draupadi, he was humiliated by the Pandavas [after he was defeated and captured]. That is why he worshiped Mahadeva [Lord Shiva] in order to get a boon to defeat the Pandavas [in the war to come later]. However, the Lord Mahadeva gave his boon with the condition that he would be able to defeat everyone with the exception of Arjuna. That is why, Arjuna, being unafraid of death, was able to kill him.
 
“avidyAsmitA rAga dveshAbhiniveshah kleshAh – iti patanjal”
[“Kleshas” [afflictions] are: ignorance, egotism, attachment, hatred and clinging to bodily life. So it is said in [the Yoga Sutras of] Patanjali.]
 
These five “kleshas” [afflictions] are nurturers in the path of pravritti and obstacles in the path of sadhana. Those pravritti-sided vrittis that come up during sadhana have been represented by Bhishma and such. In order to make His Lila [Divine Play] be robust, the Supreme Lord created these vrittis – in the form of Yuyudhan and such – as obstacles in the practice of sadhana; and adding more impediments to sadhana, He made the kleshas the most senior, [as represented] in the forms of Bhishma, Drona and such. 9) “Anye cha bahavAh shurA” [other brave warriors] = Shalya, Kritavarma and such. Shalya = thorn, or dart/spear – if such a thing is present, there is the experience of continuous affliction. Whether the karma-samskaras [automatic tendencies – which are born from actions – to behave, think and feel in particular ways] are good or bad, they are the cause of the jiva's bondage. Thus, Shalya represents the jiva's samskaric actions. As “he” is eventually extinguished in the space/ether-element through the practice of Kriyayoga – that is what is [expressed as] the killing of Shalya by Yudhishthira as written in the Mahabharata. Kritavarma = the love for one's body; the effort to save/protect the body. “YuddhavishAradah” [masters of war] – all of those vrittis, which are like thorns to doing good works [or: spiritual practice], are able to keep the jiva locked in the path of samsara – meaning: as long as they exist, Release or Liberation does not come about for the jiva.