#### Prose 

यत्र योगेश्वर: कृष्णो यत्र पार्थो धनुर्धर: |
तत्र श्रीर्विजयो भूतिध्रुवा नीतिर्मतिर्मम || 78||
yatra yogeśhvaraḥ kṛiṣhṇo yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ
tatra śhrīr vijayo bhūtir dhruvā nītir matir mama

 #### Bengali Translation 

Where the Lord of Yoga Sri Krishna (is present), and Partha is ready with the bow, that is where Rajalakshmi [Goddess of Blessings], victory, wealth (possessions) and uncorrupted righteousness/rightness are. This is my view (certain conviction).

 #### Commentary 

Wherever Sri Krishna – the One Who is the Lord of all of the yogas, the Radiance of the Brahman-Knowledge Himself, the bestower of Liberation – is the Teacher, where the sadhak Arjuna – the one who rises up from the web of material nature with his bow (the sadhak whose spinal column never stoops; it just remains upright) – is the questioner – that is where there is Shree (the Goddess of Knowledge Sarada [Sarasvati]), victory (the power to control all powers), prosperity (opulence), justice/rightness (the final fruit of judgment/enquiry – Brahman-ness). This is my firm view, determined from Truth. This is my mind/heart’s unshakeable and certain conviction.

— Begin Secondary Commentary & Conclusion — Dear sadhak [aspirant; dedicated one; yogi; spiritual practitioner]! You are a traveler on the road of yoga on the path of devotion. Take this final statement by Sanjaya as a helpful aid on your path. If that is done, then you will never become despondent. Take up your bow and make Krishna your Charioteer. He is the Lord of Yoga [all yogas]. He will take you and engage you in the right path. Keeping the spinal column straight and steady according to the knowledge gained from the performance of the practice of guru’s teaching is that which is “taking up the bow.” What is “making Krishna the charioteer”? Krishna is the Form of Sattva Guna, or Sattva Guna Manifested. Make this Sattva Guna your director. Your eating, behaving, going about, rites and sacrifices, religious actions and actions [in general] – do them in a sattvic way. Make Sattva Guna your friend. Make your mind, heart and energy sattva-filled. If that happens you will have Krishna as your Charioteer. This Sattva [in this case, the word also means: Essence] is the One Who is the Lord of Yoga. Other than this [way], there is no way of attaining perfection. It is He who is “bhAsvatA jnAnadeepena” [Radiance of the Lamp of Knowledge]. He will destroy “your” tamas-guna born of ignorance. And only with the beneficence of Sattva will you attain “parAṃ shAnti” [Supreme Peace] and “shAshvataṃ sthAnam” [Eternal Abode]. If you, in this way, take up the bow upon making the Lord of Yoga Sattva the Charioteer – whoever becomes this [kind of being] – it is in that very being that: Shree (the Blessed Manifestations of Yoga in the body, and the Goddess of Knowledge), victory (Yoga-Perfection), wealth (opulences/spiritual manifestations/miracles), and firm rightness (the uncorrupted Settledness in Brahman; jivanmukti [Liberation while living in the body]) are all present. This is a statement of absolute certainty. There is not a speck of doubt in this. This is Upanishad [absolute Truth; scripture of absolute wisdom]. Along with this, remember: “yasya deve parA bhaktiryathA deve tathA gurau; tasyaite kathitAhyarthAh prkAshante mahAtmanah” – meaning: the one who has supreme devotion to God – and as that one is towards God, so is that one’s devotion towards guru. It is to that great soul that all of this wisdom that is stated here is fully revealed. [Alternate translation: It is by that great soul that all of this wisdom that is stated here is fully attained/realized.] — End Secondary Commentary & Conclusion —