#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
इदं तु ते गुह्यतमं प्रवक्ष्याम्यनसूयवे |
ज्ञानं विज्ञानसहितं यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेऽशुभात् || 1||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
idaṁ tu te guhyatamaṁ pravakṣhyāmyanasūyave
jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ yaj jñātvā mokṣhyase ’śhubhāt

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “You have become devoid of disbelief. For this reason, I am imparting this ‘jnana’ [knowledge] with ‘vijnana’ [applied knowledge], knowing which, you will be freed from evil.”

 #### Commentary 

Now, dear sadhak, see. In the 8th chapter [of the Gita], the whole of the path, from the starting point of the first initiation going all the way to the end – [the “end” means] how one attains the Supreme Abode when leaving the body – that has been taught. Now, what the way of “jivanmukti” [Liberated but continuing to live in the body] is – meaning: while being in the body, like an eel, how one can remain unbound even while being in Prakriti – that very thing is being taught. “Idantu te” [this, but to thee] etc. – this teaching – this is extremely secret. This cannot be found in language. You have learned to dive [in consciousness]; that is why you have earned the right. Therefore, know now “jnana” [knowledge] with “vijnana” [applied knowledge]. “Jnana” is the knowing by “I”. And “vijnana” is all that is understood to be “mine” – the knowing of that, or the knowledge of Prakriti’s works. “Jnana” = “ja” + “jna” + “a” [long “a”] + “na”; “ja” = “jaayamaan” – meaning: everything that is of the creation-preservation-destruction [principle]; “jna” = the particle of scent – meaning: whatever has sound, touch, sight, taste and scent within it; “a” [long “a”] means “aasakti” [attachment; attached-ness]; “na” means “naasti” [annihilation; non-existence]. That is why it is said: the state that is devoid of the attachment to the things of the creation-preservation-destruction-endowed visible world[s], the state, which, at the same time, is not the unconscious state of fainting or sleep – that very state [of non-attachment and still aware] is the “vijnana” within the “jnana-state.” If the creation is to be understood, it cannot be done by being in the state of Settledness in Brahman. One has to come down just a little, mingle with Prakriti and then understand. Therefore, Settledness in Brahman is one level, and settledness within Prakriti is another level. In the Settledness in Brahman, there are no adjuncts/prefixes. In Prakriti, everything is with adjuncts/prefixes. The “vi” prefix denotes specificity [as in: “vijnana,” denoting specific or special jnana]. These two [jnana and vijnana] are very different in substance from one another. If one can know this jnana which is accompanied by vijnana, then there is no obstacle to being unbound. This is because: when I fell in the trap of Prakriti, I could not understand Prakriti, and that is why I became dressed-up as “jiva” [individual soul/being]. As soon as I understood/knew, immediately “jnana” happened. And I became “Shiva” [Universal/Supreme Being]. Thus, no obstacles remained for Settledness in Brahman to be attained. And “jivanmukti” also came.