#### Prose 

यावत्सञ्जायते किञ्चित्सत्वं स्थावरजङ्गमम् |
क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञसंयोगात्तद्विद्धि भरतर्षभ || 27||
yāvat sañjāyate kiñchit sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamam
kṣhetra-kṣhetrajña-sanyogāt tad viddhi bharatarṣhabha

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Bharatarshabha [Arjuna]! All substances (things) that arise, from the inert to living beings – know that all of that happens due to the union of the field and the knower of the field.

 #### Commentary 

That spiritual practice that was just spoken about, the one where Ishvara [the God aspect of a being] breaks through the fences of Prakriti and returns to Boundlessness, the one where the dharma of death (birth and death) is destroyed and Immortality is attained – its most subtle subject-matter (the primary practice) is the knowledge of the union of the field and the knower of the field. O Bharatarshabha [Arjuna]! O Arjuna! For as long as there is the delusional thinking that these two types of imaginary insubstantial things – “sthavar” (the non-moving things) and “jangam” (those that move about) – are eternal and true – meaning: “kshetra” [the field] (the happenings of Prakriti), and “kshetrajna” [knower of the field] (the fence of Maya around Brahman, [an idea that] cannot actually be conceived, [an idea] that is totally opposite in concept [to “kshetra”] and totally unrelated to the other [nonsense]) – [for as long as there is] no understanding of the difference between these two – know that for that long there is the union of the field and the knower of the field. It is like the fear that comes about when seeing elephants, horses, ghosts and ghouls in a dream, but there is no fear when one is awake – in the same way, upon the rising of the Knowledge of Brahman, there is no delusion that remains about some fence of Maya being around Brahman-Substance. Continuously analyzing (through intense practice) Prakriti, the mutations of Prakriti, the permutations, and the state of Purush, the delusion of the union of the field and the knower of the field is torn apart. The seed of rebirth does not remain. Know that this is the teaching of the ultimate practice in order for you to have Liberation. See its clear proof. The day that you sit down to do Kriya and no longer have the desire to attain the paravastha of Kriya, that is the very day that you attain that paravastha. And the days on which you keep that desire – no way does it happen on those days.