#### Prose 

चञ्चलं हि मन: कृष्ण प्रमाथि बलवद्दृढम् |
तस्याहं निग्रहं मन्ये वायोरिव सुदुष्करम् || 34||
chañchalaṁ hi manaḥ kṛiṣhṇa pramāthi balavad dṛiḍham
tasyāhaṁ nigrahaṁ manye vāyor iva su-duṣhkaram

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Krishna! I see the mind as extremely restless, troubling, powerful and indomitable. To capture this mind is like capturing the air/wind. It seems to me to be an extremely difficult affair.

 #### Commentary 

The equipoise/equilibrium of the chitta is that which is called “yoga.” This equipoise does not happen instantly. In the beginning, it is experienced in momentary durations. And right then it breaks, like being startled out of being entranced. The cause of this, verily, is the mind's restlessness born of the magnetism to the worldly experience. Thus, in this state, the sadhak does not attain the Still Settledness – meaning: does not get samadhi of long duration. This is what is being spoken by Arjuna in the 33rd sloka [of this Chapter 6]. But, upon experiencing momentary Stillness in Kriyayoga, the sadhak comes to know about the nature of the mind. The sadhak sees that the mind is extremely “chanchal” [restless], “pramathi” [troubling] – meaning: chases after one or another worldly experience and upsets the aggregate of the senses; it does not allow them to be tranquil; “balavat” [strong] – meaning: it is so strong that it cannot be brought under control; and it is “dridha” [firm] – meaning: it is unbreakable in its being wrapped up in the desires of the worldly experience; if one tries to break it, one ends up being wrapped up in those very desires. Because of seeing all of this, the sadhak thinks: just as it is extremely difficult to stop air in the body, controlling the mind is just as difficult. It just cannot be brought under control. Thus, having become desperate, the sadhak again surrenders him/herself to guru (looks to the Self). Sri Krishna is actually the Guru. He takes the sins and such errors of the devotees and does “karshan” to the sins [digs them out], and later does “aakarshan” to the devotees [draws; magnetizes; attracts], and brings them to attainment of Nirvana. This is why one of His Names is “Krishna” [One Who draws the soul by His Magnetic Power to Liberation]. 