#### Prose 

स घोषो धार्तराष्ट्राणां हृदयानि व्यदारयत् |
नभश्च पृथिवीं चैव तुमुलोऽभ्यनुनादयन् || 19||
sa ghoṣho dhārtarāṣhṭrāṇāṁ hṛidayāni vyadārayat
nabhaśhcha pṛithivīṁ chaiva tumulo abhyanunādayan

 #### Bengali Translation 

That tumultuous sound completely filled the sky and the Earth with its tremendous resonance and the hearts of the side of Dhritarashtra were filled with trepidation.

 #### Commentary 

When the sadhak goes on listening to all of these sounds, he/she is captivated in astonishment, and thereby becomes drawn in that direction [of the sounds]. From the “earth” (Muladhar) to the “sky” (Vishuddha), all of the places become filled with sound. But because of the active potency of desire being strong in [the sadhak's] mind, and therefore not being able to discern between good and bad, he/she feels that all of those sounds [from the Pandava side] are forewarning danger and [thus the sadhak] tries to get rid of [those sounds]; but he/she is not able to do so. A kind of longing comes about in the heart; it feels like the heart is being devastated. In the progress of sadhana, when the sound first starts to rise up, these types of states come about. All of these things are to be known by oneself [or: through one's own experience]; it cannot be understood through explanation.
 
When there is pressure, if a bad feeling rises in the mind, immediately after that a good feeling naturally comes up; this is true without a doubt. That is why, right after that [aforementioned] “Dhritarashtra-type” of feeling rises, the “Panadava-type” of feeling that is written about in the [following] 20th sloka comes up. But if desire remains strong, even the words of wisdom become eventually filled with ignorance. The words from the 21st sloka [of Chapter 1] onwards exemplify that.