#### Prose 

समं कायशिरोग्रीवं धारयन्नचलं स्थिर: |
सम्प्रेक्ष्य नासिकाग्रं स्वं दिशश्चानवलोकयन् || 13||
samaṁ kāya-śhiro-grīvaṁ dhārayann achalaṁ sthiraḥ
samprekṣhya nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ diśhaśh chānavalokayan

 #### Bengali Translation 

Keeping “kaya” (the middle section of the body), “sheera” [head] and “greeva” [neck] straight and unmoving, being vigilant in steadiness, and thereupon looking steadily at the part where the nose begins, without paying attention in any other direction whatsoever (one should practice yoga).

 #### Commentary 

After having spoken in the previous sloka [6:12] about the method of asana for the practice of yoga, [now,] how the body has to be managed – that is what He [Sri Krishna] is speaking about in this sloka. If one keeps the two shoulders in a natural position, has the chest out, makes the whole of the upper back upright (straight), makes the part where the beard would grow on the chin be directed towards the chest, and keeps the head as straight as possible, then one has “samaṃ kAyasheerogreevam” [the body, head and neck in a straight/aligned position]. One has to keep the head, neck and the spine straight/aligned in such a way that the three become one, and that they do not move in any way. Holding the body in that way, one has to mentally look from the side of the mastak granthi [see Introduction to the Pranab Gita] in the area exactly between the two eyebrows – where the Agya-chakra is – at that place. No kind of manipulation or force should be applied on the eyes themselves. If one simply closes the eyes and easily directs the sight mentally, the seeing will naturally become steadied in the area in the middle of the eyebrows. If one keeps one's sight still in that way and performs Kriya, many kinds of colorful things can be seen all around, but one should not look at any of those things. The sight should only be kept in the middle. One has to perform yoga in this way. 