#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
बहूनि मे व्यतीतानि जन्मानि तव चार्जुन |
तान्यहं वेद सर्वाणि न त्वं वेत्थ परन्तप || 5||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
bahūni me vyatītāni janmāni tava chārjuna
tānyahaṁ veda sarvāṇi na tvaṁ vettha parantapa

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “O Parantapa Arjuna! You and I have had many lives in the past. I know all of those, but you do not know.”

 #### Commentary 

The entrance of consciousness into the coverings endowed with names and forms is called “birth.” Whatever coverings there are, they are all Prakriti's. Prakriti (Avyakta [Inexpressible]) – Mahat [Great], self (ahamkar [personal self]), intellect, mind, tanmatras [source faculties behind the senses], sense-organs etc. comprise the divisions of the twenty-four substances. Each of these is a particular covering. The Avyakta [the Inexpressible] is the space between Prakriti and Purush. This Avyakta is indeed the Chidakash [sky of consciousness]. This is the seed of the Prakritic blossoming – meaning: it is the root cause of the creation-preservation-destruction aspects of Prakritic things. That is why it is called “Mula Prakriti” [root Prakriti]. In this Chidakash, the reflection of the Light of Consciousness/Spirit takes place at the place of Mahat, or the bridge-point of consciousness. This reflected light is Chijjyoti [light of consciousness] or Vivasvan [Spiritual Sun]. Because it is “first,” or, because it is the appearance of Adi [Primal] Maya, it is called “Aditya” [sun]. Later, through further manifestation, Mahat-tattva – meaning: chitta [jiva consciousness] – emerges. Mahat is actually “Manu” [archetypal progenitor] or “mind.” — Begin Footnote. — The creation-facing antahkarana. — End Footnote. — Because it has come forth from Vivasvan, it is known as “Vaivasvata” [offspring of Vivasvan]. In the outer side of the chitta, where the Light of Consciousness is reflected and thereby becomes Vivasvan – the junction of Avyakta and chitta at that place is called “Kuta.” The Kuta is an internal chakra — Begin Footnote. — The function of this Kuta is quite wondrous. It is like a hot frying pan made of glass. Just like when the light of the fire goes through the glass and takes on the color of the glass, and like when unhusked rice touches that glass that the adhesive liquid in the husk comes apart and the liquid evaporates as steam – the husk is separated, and when the rice is popped, it makes popped rice – it is just like that when the Consciousness-Reality comes to the Kuta, It takes on the form according to the state at that time in the Kuta, and when the sadhak's mind comes and touches that Kuta, the bondage of karma for the mind/heart comes apart and karma disappears. The covering of the worldly experience becomes separated, and the mind ends its form and takes on the Form of the Pure Consciousness-Reality. — End Footnote. — of Mayic-current. Supreme Consciousness/Spirit, being reflected in Kuta, takes on many kinds of Forms. This Kutastha Chaitanya is verily, “Ishvara” [personal God] – the personal Deity of the sadhak. He bestows blessings to the sadhak, and appears in many forms that are pleasing to the sadhak's heart. That is why it is written in the scriptures: “sAdhakAnAṃ hitArthAya brahmano roopakalpana” [for the benefit of the sadhak, a form of [the Formless] Brahman is conceived]. Up to the place of Ishvara, the Self or Consciousness is known as “Aham” [“I”]. From Mahat-tattva or chitta emerges “ahamkar” [personal self; ego]. From the ahamkar comes “buddhi” [intellect]; from the intellect comes [evident] mind etc. - in this way, the transmuting activities of Prakriti spreads fully and throughout. The Consciousness-Reality enters all of these and makes them conscious. Although Consciousness/Spirit, within this mind-intellect-ego[-etc.] takes on different experiential aspects because of the differences of mind-intellect-ego[-etc.], the name of the aggregate [consciousness] is “jiva” [individual soul]. — Begin Footnote. — In the world of the jivas, according to the greater and lesser amounts of the consciousness-power, four categoric divisions can be made. They are: (1) “sankuchita chetana” [contracted consciousness] – stones; (2) “mukulita chetana” [budding consciousness] – plants, trees; (3) “vikasita chetana” [blossomed or developed consciousness] - “svedaja” [sweat-born], “andaja” [egg-born] and “jarayuja” [womb-born] (with the exception of humans); and (4) “poornavikasita chetana” [fully developed consciousness] - humans. In the antahkarana – mind, intellect, ego and chitta – the various ways of the consciousness-power appearing in these four fields bring about the four different categories of human beings. They are: (1) “brahmin” - one whose consciousness-power is always operating in all of the mind-intellect-ego-chitta; (2) “kshatriya” - one whose consciousness-power is operating in mind-intellect-ego – in these three fields; (3) “vaishya” - one whose consciousness-power is operating in mind-intellect – in these two fields; and (4) “shudra” - one whose consciousness-power is operating in only the mind. And again, according to the greater or lesser levels of wellness in the structures in these four fields as well as the capacity of reflection-power [of consciousness], these four classifications of human beings also are of three types: excellent, ordinary and base. — End Footnote. — This “jiva” is the one who is addressed as “tvaṃ” [you; see the last line of sloka 4:5 above for the occurrence of the word]. Because the jiva is ego-endowed, it is “asarvagya” [not all-knowing] (“svalpagya” [knowing little]). Because “Ishvara” is without ego, it is “sarvagya” [all-knowing]. In the middle area between this jiva and Ishvara (meaning: just like the kind of place on the outer side of the chitta where Vivasvan is – exactly like that kind place but on the inner side), a softly bright sphere is seen. That is the moon-sphere. (If that moon-sphere is pierced, Kuta is seen; if Kuta is pierced, Ishvara is seen. Ishvara merges into Vivasvan. After that there is Avyakta, and after that is Purush. This is the form of sadhana's progression.) See the 4th and 5th illustrations in the Introduction [of the Pranab Gita]. The aforementioned various differences in the coverings have been conceived as the “many lives” of “ahaṃ” [“I”] - meaning: Shiva-Chaitanya, and “tvaṃ” - meaning: the jiva-consciousness. The truth that the Consciousness-Reality appears in various ways in the various coverings – that is only directly realized in the State of Shiva. It is not realized in the state of jiva. This is because: for as long as the sadhak stays in the jiva-consciousness, for that long does the sadhak's “I” consciousness from the distorted worldly experience remain. Later, when the sadhak rises up to Shiva-Consciousness, then the sadhak's “I”-ness becomes completely pure. It is in the pure “I”-ness that the universe is reflected. It does not happen in the distorted “I”-ness. That is why it has been said [in the above sloka]: “ahaṃ veda tvaṃ na vettha” [it is known to Me, not to you]. Srigurudev [Sri Krishna], using two [particular] words to address the sadhak, has beautifully shown the sadhak's state of being at this time. One word is “Arjuna” and the other is “Parantapa.” “Arjuna”: “a” [without] + “rajju” [rope] + “n[a]” [not] – meaning: one who is not free of bondage. The only bondage is “samsara-karma” [samsara-acts]. That karma is of two types: “sukarma” [good acts] and “kukarma” [bad acts]. It is the Self that is “su” - meaning: beautiful, and the non-Self-substances are “ku” [bad]. It is said in the Mahabharata that Arjuna's name was “Arjuna” because he had only done “sukarma” in the world. The “tadarthya karma” [the work for “That”; meaningful work; spiritual work] is the sadhak's “sukarma.” Although this vritti [functionality] is directed towards the Self, because the karma is still a covering between the jiva and Ishvara – until that karma [spiritual act] is finished, the jiva remains as one of little knowledge and cannot become one who knows all. That sadhak who is attached to the veiling-power in the form of “sukarma” [spiritual works] is “Arjuna.” “Parantapa”: “para” - meaning: Prakriti. That from which “tapita” [feeling of pressure; heat] occurs – that one is “Parantapa.” In the sadhak's mind at the beginning [of sadhana practice], there is this kind of awareness: “I am indeed the Self; I am not Prakriti.” The feeling of duality stays strong. Thus, there is a desire to cast off Prakriti. The jiva endowed with that desire – in the form of the casting-off power – to abandon [Prakriti] is Parantapa. — Begin Footnote. — See Chapter 2, sloka 9 for the commentary on “Parantapa.”  — End Footnote. —