#### Prose 

प्रशान्तात्मा विगतभीर्ब्रह्मचारिव्रते स्थित: |
मन: संयम्य मच्चित्तो युक्त आसीत मत्पर: || 14||
praśhāntātmā vigata-bhīr brahmachāri-vrate sthitaḥ
manaḥ sanyamya mach-chitto yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

After that, with serenity of self, without fear, being established in “brahmacharya” [ordinary meaning: celibacy; see the commentary to this sloka below for spiritual meaning], with a controlled mind, absorbed heart, surrendered to Me and being united, one should sit. 

 #### Commentary 

Upon performing yoga in the ways stated in the previous slokas, there is purification of oneself. At that time, the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] becomes serene – meaning: because there is no internal upending happening, the possibility of breaking off from that [serene] state is gone; thus one becomes fearless. In this state, as the association with the world is cast off, the Naad-Brahman [Divine Sound] that rises up within – the sadhak goes on following that [Sound], and does not do any other Kriya. One becomes free of karma [action and its fruits and any acts in general] and goes up to the Sahasrar. At this time, because there is only the taking of recourse only in Naad-Brahman, the sadhak becomes “brahmachari” [in the Nature of Brahman]. And because his/her mind's volition and indolence both become automatically withdrawn, the sadhak has a controlled mind. And as the chitta [personal consciousness] gradually enters that Sound, an Incredibly Beautiful Light is seen. Later, one enters that Light as well. This is the “macchitta” [the mind in Me/the Self] state. Finally, as this activity of the inner journey comes to an end, the Still State that comes about, that is the “matpara” [surrendered to Me/the Self] (“maniShTha” [established in Me/the Self]) state. After this there are no more vrittis [activities] of the chitta left. They merge in that Light and become “yukta” [united]. This is that which called “vrittivismaran” [no memory of functionalities], or stopping of the waves in personal consciousness, or the state of Oneness. [This is] the “yukta” [united] (attained via yoga) state. In this state, the body just sits like a pot filled with water and nothing more.