#### Prose 

युञ्जन्नेवं सदात्मानं योगी नियतमानस: |
शान्तिं निर्वाणपरमां मत्संस्थामधिगच्छति || 15||
yuñjann evaṁ sadātmānaṁ yogī niyata-mānasaḥ
śhantiṁ nirvāṇa-paramāṁ mat-sansthām adhigachchhati

 #### Bengali Translation 

Continuously merging the mind [in the Self] according to the stated injunctions, the yogi attains that Supreme Peace known as Nirvana, which exists within the Self. 

 #### Commentary 

The Supreme Peace is that which is Brahman-Nirvana – the ultimate result of yoga. When “sadaa samadhi” [samadhi at all times] is practiced continuously, that [Brahman-Nirvana] happens. The word “sadaa” [always] in this sloka and the word “satata” [always] have the same definition – meaning: both words mean “sarvadaa” [at all times]. Now the issue is this: it is impossible for the yogic practitioner to enjoy unbroken samadhi at all times; so how is it that this statement [“samadhi at all times”] is being put forth? And again, it is written in the yogic scriptures: “divA na pujayellingaṃ rAtrau naiva cha poojayet; sarvadApoojayellingaṃ divArAtrAtri nirodhatah” - meaning: one shall not perform the worship of Taraka-Brahman Kutastha in the day or night; one should do it “sarvadaa” [ordinary meaning: at all times; spiritual meaning follows]. It is only then that all “siddhis” [attainments] can be had. — Begin Footnote. — This definition is the externally oriented meaning of this sloka. By this [definition], external time has been addressed. There is a spiritual meaning of this [sloka]. That is this: “divaa” [day] = the expanding of the sun – meaning: in the pingala [nadi]; “raatrau” [night] = the expanding of the moon – meaning: in the ida [nadi]. If one is to worship Kutastha Brahman, one must not move prana through either the ida or the pingala. One should stop the ida and pingala, and move prana in the sushumna [nadi] (the Kriya [special technique] is known from guru). Only when this happens does the mind become still; it pierces Kutastha and merges with Supreme Shiva. “SuShumnAntargate vayau manahsthairyah prajAyate” [when vital-air goes within the sushumna, the mind abides in stillness]. It is the sushumna that is bestower of all attainments. That is why it is called “sarvadaa” [bestower of all]. — End Footnote. — What is that which is called “sarvadaa”? From sunrise to sunset is “divaa” [lit] and from sunset to sunrise is “nishaa” [dark]. From dusk until 9 pm, and from 4 am until dawn of this “nishaa” is called “raatri” [night], and the time from 9 pm until 4 am – the time of these 7 hours is called “mahanishaa” [great darkness] - “mahamahanishaa” [great, great darkness] - “kaalraatri” [the night of time] or “sarvadaa.” If one does worship at this time, the Beloved Deity is pleased and bestows all attainments; that is why this time is called “sarvadaa” [meaning in this case: bestowal of all]. It is in accordance with this particular usage of “sarvadaa” that the words “sadaa” and “satata” have been used. This is the ideal time for the practice of yoga. This is because in the eight parts of the day and night – it is during this particular time period that the full influence of tamoguna is present. If one practices Kriya at this time, the mind is quickly drawn into settledness by the pure tamas [guna] and [thereby] attains stillness – meaning: attains samadhi. In the beginning, samadhi is of little duration. Gradually, as practice increases, the duration of samadhi also increases. Due to the differences in the associations [at the time of samadhi], samadhi is of two types: “jada samadhi” [physical samadhi] and “Chaitanya Samadhi” [samadhi in Consciousness/Spirit]. In the state of meditation, if the antahkarana stops because of concentration on some Prakritic thing, then there is “jada samadhi.” This is the inferior type. But, if in the state of meditation one does not break off from the Self or Consciousness/Spirit and merges into Consciousness/Spirit Itself – if that happens, then there is “Chaitanya Samadhi.” It is this Chaitanya Samadhi that is the “matsaṃsthAṃ shAntim” [Peace in merging with Me/the Self]. That which is called “samadhi” in yogic scriptures is actually this Chaitanya Samadhi. This samadhi is again of two types: “sampragyata” and “asampragyata.” The kind of samadhi that still has “pragya” - meaning: self-awareness – meaning: the state in which the antahkarana is completely locked in the attention towards the Self, where there is not even the idea of being thrown off, but where there is still a sense of being a separate existence – it is this samadhi that is called “sampragyata samadhi.” And again, sampragyata samadhi can be further divided into four types: “vitarka” [questioning], “vichara” [ascertaining], “ananda” [blissful] and “asmita” [“I”-ness]; these are connected, respectively, to the four separate fields of the antahkarana: “manas” [surface mind], “buddhi” [intellect], “ahankar” [ego] and “chitta” [personal consciousness; heart]. And when everything ends, when there is the state of “no memory of vrittis,” when there is no knowledge of anything – that is known as “asampragyata samadhi.” This is the highest and ultimate samadhi. This highest asampragyata samadhi is this sloka's “matsaṃsthAṃ nirvANaparamAṃ shAntim” - meaning: Peace in the form of Consciousness-Nirvana (the State of being extinguished in Awareness). 