#### Prose 

भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शक्य अहमेवंविधोऽर्जुन |
ज्ञातुं द्रष्टुं च तत्त्वेन प्रवेष्टुं च परन्तप || 54||
bhaktyā tv ananyayā śhakya aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna
jñātuṁ draṣhṭuṁ cha tattvena praveṣhṭuṁ cha parantapa

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Parantapa Arjuna! Only through single-minded devotion can I – revealing Myself in this Form of the Supreme Goal – be known, seen and [only through single-minded devotion] can one enter Me.

 #### Commentary 

The sadhak that has the ability to have power over even Parashakti [ruling power in creation] due to his/her sadhana – that is the sadhak who is called “Parantapa” [one who has power over even the ruling power]. To perform Kriya without breaking off of the practice and doing it with unwavering faith in guru’s teachings is that which is called “ananyabhakti” [single-minded devotion]. Only through this single-minded devotion can this Universal I-Substance (meaning: “I”) be known element by element – can be understood – meaning: progressively rising up through the earth-element, liquid-element, fire-element, air-element, space-element etc. – gradually rising up, the awareness/understanding of that kind of Form of the Self comes forth (this is that which is called “karma-kanda” [action phase] of sadhana [spiritual practice]). Later, It is realized [is real] – meaning: the Universal Form is directly seen. (This is that which is called “upasana-kanda” [the phase of experiential worship of the Lord’s Glories].) After this, one enters into that Universal Form – meaning: upon continuously looking at that Form, one loses oneself and merges with That; Liberation is attained. (This is that which is called “jnana-kanda” [the phase of Supreme Knowledge/Awareness].) Therefore, without “bhakti” [devotion], there is no “mukti” [Liberation]. The process of doing bhaktisadhana [devotion-practice] is being stated in this sloka. First, [there is] single-minded devotion – meaning: having become enthusiastic about spirituality, one does the performance of the Kriya of the Self according to the teachings of guru; later [there is] direct knowledge by oneself; and later [there is] the attainment of Liberation. Thus, it is now understood that the beginning phase of spiritual practice is devotion, the middle phase is Knowledge, and the final state is Liberation. That is why it is said, “devotion is itself Liberation” – “bhaktimuktireva sunischita” [it is absolutely certain that devotion is verily Liberation]. 