#### Prose 

यज्ञशिष्टामृतभुजो यान्ति ब्रह्म सनातनम् |
नायं लोकोऽस्त्ययज्ञस्य कुतोऽन्य: कुरुसत्तम || 31||
yajña-śhiṣhṭāmṛita-bhujo yānti brahma sanātanam
nāyaṁ loko ’styayajñasya kuto ’nyaḥ kuru-sattama

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kurusattama [Arjuna]! Those who do not do yagya do not even have “ihaloka” [this world/plane]; how can it be that they would have “anya loka” [other worlds/planes]?

 #### Commentary 

Those who do not search for the Self through worshipping the Beloved Deity with devotion and reverence – their inner state is full of sorrow/pain – meaning: their inner sky is covered with darkness. Thus, they cannot see the Light of the Self. The impurities in the chitta are also not removed. The reason for this is: by not being able to know the truth about samsara, they believe the impermanent and untrue to be Eternal and True, and they remain in delusion. If one takes the help of the Light of the Self and attains the Knowledge of Truth, one can have Peace even living in the samsara of pain and delusion; this does not happen for them. That is why they do not even have “ihaloka” [this world/plane]. — Begin Footnote. —  [“Ihaloka:] “i” = small power; “ha” = to cast off; “loka” = whatever there is to be seen – meaning: after casting off the small power through the upward directed progress of sadhana, the things that are seen at the beginning of being with the greater power – that is called “ihaloka.” Even child/novice sadhaks witness this. — End Footnote. — If this world/plane is not there, then how can there be the realization of other worlds/planes through sadhana? After leaving the body [dying] - the worlds/planes that are attained due to the results of good karma [actions] – all of those are “anya loka” [other worlds/planes]. All of those worlds/planes are progressively better. The world/plane that is at the very top of that gradation – that is “Goloka” - “Vaikuntha” [names for the Supreme Abode], or the Destination from which there is no return. If yagya [spiritual act] is not performed, the Self is not seen; thus, “ihaloka” [this world/plane] [for that person] is filled with disturbance. If the Self is not seen, the Supreme Destination is not attained; thus, one has to remain in the turbulence of birth and death. Therefore, dear sadhak! Perform yagya [yogic act]. You have the ability to perform yagya. That is why you are called “Kurusattama” - meaning: fully adept (endowed with success).