#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
दृष्ट्वेमं स्वजनं कृष्ण युयुत्सुं समुपस्थितम् |
सीदन्ति मम गात्राणि मुखं च परिशुष्यति || 28||
arjuna uvācha
dṛiṣhṭvemaṁ sva-janaṁ kṛiṣhṇa yuyutsuṁ samupasthitam
sīdanti mama gātrāṇi mukhaṁ cha pariśhuṣhyati

वेपथुश्च शरीरे मे रोमहर्षश्च जायते || 29||
vepathuśh cha śharīre me roma-harṣhaśh cha jāyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said, “O Krishna! Upon seeing these relatives present in front of me, all of my limbs have lost all energy and my mouth has become dry. My body is trembling and full of chills. The “gandiva” [bow] is falling from my hands and my body is burning.” 

 #### Commentary 

Because of the sadhak's mental restlessness becoming overwhelming during this state, sweat comes out of the body; the mouth becomes dry; the whole body trembles and becomes full of chills. The “gandiva” [bow] falls off, and there is a kind of burning sensation in the whole body. These experiences are known personally by anyone who can even be called a sadhak. So there is no need to explain [this matter] that much. But some explanation is necessary for [the statement] “the 'gandiva' [bow] falls off.” When sitting in the “samaṃ kAyashrogreevaṃ” [body, head and neck in line; posture of sitting straight; see paragraph beginning with “Dhanurudyamya” in the commentary on sloka 20 of Chapter 1], the sadhak's spinal column in the back becomes bowed [towards the front of the body]. The back then looks just like a canoe/skiff; the spinal column in that condition is called “gandiva” [bow]. Right at the time restlessness comes to the mind of the sadhak, the body begins to tremble, and because of tension in the whole body, the sadhak cannot remain straight and still any longer. The body droops, and the “jnana-mudra” in the hand comes open. That condition has been referred to as “the bow falling off.”