#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
स्थाने हृषीकेश तव प्रकीर्त्या
जगत्प्रहृष्यत्यनुरज्यते च |
रक्षांसि भीतानि दिशो द्रवन्ति
सर्वे नमस्यन्ति च सिद्धसङ्घा: || 36||
arjuna uvācha
sthāne hṛiṣhīkeśha tava prakīrtyā
jagat prahṛiṣhyaty anurajyate cha
rakṣhānsi bhītāni diśho dravanti
sarve namasyanti cha siddha-saṅghāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said: “O Hrishikesh [Sri Krishna]! The world sings of Your Glories in praise, joy and delight. The demons, in fear, are fleeing in all directions. And all realized beings are bowing in reverence. All of this is rightly so.”

 #### Commentary 

Returning to his/her natural state, the sadhak, again remembering the previous experience, is saying within him/herself, “O Hrishikesh [Self]! That the world will be enamored with You upon seeing your supernatural Glories – of course it should be so. And on this path, I am seeing that the torturous, evil demons (enemies such as lust, anger etc.) are fleeing in fear in all directions. And it is as if the world is brimming over with ecstasy and delight. (When the sadhak experiences the seeing and remembering of the incredible vision in the state before the paravastha of Kriya [poise after Kriya] and the paravastha of the paravastha of Kriya [state after the paravastha of Kriya] – at that time, the sadhak becomes intoxicated in that Cosmic Bliss.) Those who have received the attainment of attainments – all of those great ones are looking at You with one focus, and via pranayam, have made ‘You-I’ as one, and are bowing to You. Lo! How absolutely true! And this happening is also very right. O Lord! How to sing Your praise – that I did not know before. But now I see that upturning the tongue and driving the prana in the anulom-vilom way from the Muladhar according to the proper method (that which makes ‘You-I’ One) – that this is actually the real singing of Your Glories.” 