#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
दृष्ट्वेदं मानुषं रूपं तव सौम्यं जनार्दन |
इदानीमस्मि संवृत्त: सचेता: प्रकृतिं गत: || 51||
arjuna uvācha
dṛiṣhṭvedaṁ mānuṣhaṁ rūpaṁ tava saumyaṁ janārdana
idānīm asmi saṁvṛittaḥ sa-chetāḥ prakṛitiṁ gataḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said: “O Janardan [Sri Krishna]! Seeing this beautiful human form of Yours, I am finally happy at heart and feel normal (I feel healthy).”

 #### Commentary 

O Janaradan [the Lord; see 1:43 of the Pranab Gita]! Seeing this heart-enchanting human form of Yours, I am no longer stuck in that all-pervading Form. I am “prakritigata” [in Prakriti; normal] – meaning: I have blended back again with Prakriti. That which happens when being connected to physical consciousness – I have become that. Having returned to the covering of Prakriti, I have again become part of the mind’s dharma. At the time of the witnessing of the Universal Form, the jiva-ness [individual-ness] crosses beyond the sky of chitta [personal consciousness] and goes into the Sky of [Universal] Consciousness. All of the things that are seen in that state – there is no end to describing them. They are inexpressible – subjects which are beyond the grasp of the mind. Thus, the mind is not pleased. It does not find peace in that terrifying Form. It indeed becomes afraid. Later, when the Lord puts away His Universal Form and takes on His human form – at that time the fear goes away. The heart is pleased. This is because one becomes happy at seeing the Beneficent Lord’s Form in a way that is related to one’s own [human] form. Seeing the Form that is not related to one’s own [human] form causes one to be afraid. 