#### Prose 

आयुधानामहं वज्रं धेनूनामस्मि कामधुक् |
प्रजनश्चास्मि कन्दर्प: सर्पाणामस्मि वासुकि: || 28||
āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ dhenūnām asmi kāmadhuk
prajanaśh chāsmi kandarpaḥ sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

I am “vajra” [thunderbolt] among “aayudha[s]” [weapons]; among “dhenu[s]” [cows], I am “Kamadhenu” [wish-fulfilling cow]; I am “Kandarpa,” the cause of the emergence of the “prajana[s]” [begotten], and among “sarpa[s]” [serpents], I am “Vasuki.”

 #### Commentary 

AyudhAnAṃ ahamvajram – Among “aayudha[s]” [weapons] I am “vajra” [thunderbolt]. “Aa” + “yudh” + “a” – that by which one does battle. Weapons and missiles and such things with which one strikes are called “aayudha[s]” or “praharan.” “Praharan” – “pra” – “prakrishta” [verity; true; actual]; “hṛ” = to do “haran” [take away] + “anat” [a suffix] – the One Who truly takes away. The thing upon which this [weapon] is applied [weapon is struck] – this weapon takes that thing’s existence away – that is why this is called “praharan.” In this body, it is only vayu [vital-air] is the “aayudha” [weapon] in the form of “praharan.” Vayu, as well, is residing in the body under many names. Among them is “vajra” [thunderbolt]. “Vaj” = going; “raṃ” = the fire-seed; fire is both self-illuminating and other-illuminating. It is luminescent, movement-endowed, and on whatever it falls, it has the power to take that away [consume that; destroy that]. The one who is like this is called “vajra.” The Great Vayu by whose operation there is the existence of the body – that supremely holy, supremely worship-worthy, lord of pranas is called “Vajra.” To whomever this great power is directed during the time of repose – that very person becomes victorious. (This is a known fact for the sadhak.) Victory is eternally established in “I”. Therefore, among “aayudhas,” “I” verily am the victory-endowed “Vajra.”
 
DhenunAmasmi kAmadhuk [among cows, I am the wish-fulfilling cow, “Kamadhuk”] – that from which a free-flowing, stomach-filling food-substance (drinkable liquid) can be had – that is called “dhenu.” The nectar that is dripping within this body – upon drinking that nectar, at the time of going to the State of Immortality, a certain state is reached where whatever is desired – that can be had. For this reason, that state is called “kamadhuk” [wish-fulfilling]. That state of Mine is very, very close to “I” and it is almost one with “I”. That is why, among “dhenus,” “I” am “Kamadhuk” (“Kamadhenu”). “Dhenu” – the sound “dhe” means “drinkable liquid” and “nu” means the “doer” – meaning: the One Who bestows the drinkable sustenance – that is the one called “dhenu” (the milk-giving cow). Among all of the kinds of digestibles, the drinkable thing is the one that is free-flowing and fills the stomach. This can be had from “dhenus” [cows]. “Kama” means “desire”; “dhu” means “stirring”; and “ka” means the “Self.” In order to understand the feeling of the word “kamadhuk,” one has to know the free-flowing stirring that happens when there is the desire to enjoy. This is the highest enjoyment and effort-free. Now dear sadhak, see. Just that much – after you have the knowledge of discerning between Prakriti and Purush – that bit that is the tone “nishad” [the equivalent of “ti” or “si” in western music’s solfeggio]  – “ni” [short form of “nishad”] is the final tone among the seven notes [of the octave]. The sustaining resonance [microtonal notes] even above that “ni,” all the way until just before reaching the octave – all of the microtones that are there just about to touch the octave but coming back down after not touching the octave, and then again making the effort to go back5 – this bit of intense coming and going without break is called the “kamadhuk” state. In this state, there is no aim but “I”. One almost reaches the “I” but is not able to do so. This oscillation that goes back and forth – even though it is a vibration/oscillation, because it is imbued with “I”, it is actually nothing else but “I” Itself. In this state, whatever a jiva [person] wants – he/she gets that very thing. That is why among “dhenus,” “I” am “Kamadhuk.” — Begin Translator’s Note — This simile refers to the technique of oscillating tones and microtones used in precise ways in Indian Classical Music, where there is no use of static chords other than a drone. The precise oscillation of one note not quite reaching the resolution note, coming back and trying to reach the resolution again and again, creates the feeling of “longing” or “wanting” –  or “kama.” — End Translator’s Note —

PrajanashchAsmi kandarpa [among “prajana[s]” [begotten], I am “Kandarpa”] – The sound “pra” means “fame” – meaning: the announcing of names; the sound “jan” means “taking birth”; and the sound “a” means “doer/lord.” The ones who are announced immediately after taking birth – meaning: the names that come about (meaning: whatever is seen in samsara) – that is “prajana.”
 
Kandarpa – “kaṃ” = Brahmaa, the creator. “Brahmaa” + “dṛp” = to do “sandipan” [captivate] + “a” (“an”) = sound related to “doing” – meaning: right upon taking birth, the one who does “sandipan” to the creator Brahmaa (entrances [the creator Brahmaa]) (the creator of a thing is “Brahmaa” to that being or thing) – that is the one who is “Kandarpa.” Now, dear sadhak! Just look at Me once. It is “I” Who am without name before birth. After birth, names are attached to “I” Itself. And the one to whom I am born, I keep that creator entranced in “I”. Therefore, “prajana” and “kandarpa” – the activation place of both of these words is “I”.
 
SarpANAsmi vAsuki [among serpents I am “Vasuki”] – serpent means hooded (venomous) snake. Among the venomous hooded snakes I am “Vasuki.” “Vasu” + “k”. “Vasu” means the “self-revealed jewel-gem,” like diamond, emerald, etc. And the sound “k” means “head.” One will be a hooded serpent (snakes are venomous), will keep the self-revealed jewel-gem in the head – the greatest among these serpents – that serpent is called “Vasuki.” The Self-revealed One is no one but “I”. Thus, whatever state of Maya that remains blended with “I” – that state is the greatest, or spoken of as “king.” Thus, among the bejeweled great serpents, “I” am “Vasuki.”
 
“I” have no state of My own. There has never been any such thing as Maya that has even existed. It is like this only to appease the dharma of the antahkarana [personal consciousness]; and the springing forth that comes forth from there – only that is the manifestation of Maya. When the game is being played with “I” in the dharma of the antahkarana, just that bit is called the highest state of Maya. Upon continuously doing guru-instructed Kriya, the hooded, luminescent, bejeweled-headed serpent that the sadhak sees in Kutastha – that serpent is verily the image of “Vasuki.” 