#### Prose 

न जायते म्रियते वा कदाचि
नायं भूत्वा भविता वा न भूय: |
अजो नित्य: शाश्वतोऽयं पुराणो
न हन्यते हन्यमाने शरीरे || 20||
na jāyate mriyate vā kadāchin
nāyaṁ bhūtvā bhavitā vā na bhūyaḥ
ajo nityaḥ śhāśhvato ’yaṁ purāṇo
na hanyate hanyamāne śharīre

 #### Bengali Translation 

This Self does not ever take birth, nor does It ever die; having been, never will it not be. It is “Aja” [Unborn/Primal], “Nitya” [Eternal], “Shashvata” [Imperishable] and “Purana” [Ancient/Ageless]. It does not die with the death of the body.

 #### Commentary 

“Aja” [Unborn/Primal]  = That which never takes birth, nor does It die. “Nitya” [Eternal] = That which always Is. “Shashvata” [Imperishable] = Indestructible. “Purana” [Ancient/Ageless] = the One Who existed before creation and exists even after destruction [of phenomena]. Because the Self is of this Character/Nature, even when the body is killed, It does not die. The body/bodies is/are called “kosha[s]” [sheath[s]]. There are five koshas: “annamaya” [food-filled], “pranamaya” [prana-filled], “manomaya” [mind-filled], “vijnanamaya” [filled with subtle knowing] and “anandamaya” [bliss-filled]. The first two make up the physical body; the second two make up the subtle body; and the last one is the causal body. In Layayoga [the yoga of merging/dissolving], when one [kosha] is destroyed, it changes/merges into another [kosha subsequently higher]. In the end, there is the “total merging/dissolving” in the True Substance. Like it is said: “jaler bimba, jale uday, lay hoye se mishay jale” [a slight variation on a line of poetry by the Bengali mystic poet Ramprasad – meaning: the water's bubble rises from water, after “laya” [dissolution] it merges back into water].