#### Prose 

द्वौ भूतसर्गौ लोकेऽस्मिन्दैव आसुर एव च |
दैवो विस्तरश: प्रोक्त आसुरं पार्थ मे शृणु || 6||
dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin daiva āsura eva cha
daivo vistaraśhaḥ prokta āsuraṁ pārtha me śhṛiṇu

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha [Arjuna]! There are two types of beings in this world - “daiva” [spiritual] and “asura” [demonic]. [The nature of] the daivas have been extensively stated. (Now) hear from Me [about] asuras. 

 #### Commentary 

Whatever kinds of “bhootas” (living beings) there are in this world of people – among them, there are two types of “sarga[s]” (characteristic natures). One is the nature of the daivas [divinely oriented] and the other is the nature of “asuras” [demonically oriented]. The two natures – monstrous and asuric [demonic] – [spoken about] in Chapter 9, sloka 12 [of the Bhagavad Gita] are being addressed here as a single term called “asuri sarga” or [asuric] nature. These two sargas [the daivic [divinely oriented] and asuric [demonic] natures] were referred to previously as “endowments.” The endowments of the daivas bring about Liberation; therefore, they are enlivening and should be had. The endowments of the asuras bring about bondage; therefore, they are repulsive and should be abandoned. The endowments that are “daivic” – [meaning:] the ones that make the human be endowed with godly nature – that has been spoken about extensively in the entire [Bhagavad] Gita – meaning: the signs of the ones with steady-consciousness in the second chapter, the signs of devotees in the twelfth chapter, the signs of knowledge in the thirteenth chapter, the signs of Purush beyond the three gunas in the fourteenth chapter, and [the signs of the daivic beings] in slokas 1 to 3 of the sixteenth chapter have been explained. And the endowments that are asuric [demonic] – the ones that make the human be endowed with asuric nature and monstrous nature – meaning: those that are therefore to be abandoned – it is necessary to know those. That is why the Lord is now describing them. 