#### Prose 

अश्वत्थ: सर्ववृक्षाणां देवर्षीणां च नारद: |
गन्धर्वाणां चित्ररथ: सिद्धानां कपिलो मुनि: || 26||
aśhvatthaḥ sarva-vṛikṣhāṇāṁ devarṣhīṇāṁ cha nāradaḥ
gandharvāṇāṁ chitrarathaḥ siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among “vrikshas” [trees], I am “ashvattha” [peepul tree; a type of fig tree], among “devarshis” [divine sages], “Narada,” among “gandharvas” [celestial beings], “Chitrarath,” and among the “siddhas” [perfected beings] I am “Kapil Muni.”

 #### Commentary 

“Ashvattha” – “a” + “shva” + “ta” + “tha”. “A” [short version] = negation; “shva” = the dawn of tomorrow. Thus, “Ashva” means that which has no time, that which is endless and beginning-less. “Ta” = “taran” or crossing over; “tha” = the five pranas, five deities, three powers, and three bindus, all of which are part of Kundalini Shakti Maya. That Endless and Beginning-less Reality which is beyond this Maya – that is “ashvattha.” “Vriksha” – “vriksh” – to wrap/enclose, and “a” = negation – the One Whom nothing and no one can wrap/enclose, the One Who has none greater than Him – the One Who is greater than all is called “vriksha.” It is That which is greater than these greats: earth, water, fire, air and space. All of these [elements] are also called “sarva” [all]. These are also “vriksha” [the greatest among phenomena]. That is because it is not easy to grasp them. But That which is attained by the great element mind – That is called Brahman. All phenomena are insignificant, impermanent and limited in relation to Brahman. That Brahman is none other than “I”. And no matter how great the beings [great ones] of Prakriti are, they cannot enwrap “I”. Thus, among all “vrikshas” [greats] “I” am “Ashvattha” [Ungraspable]. “Ashvattha” = the destroyer of moments – meaning: where even momentary time does not arise.
 
Devarshi [divine sage] – a special state of being. The state in which every aspect [of existence] is known along with its cause, form and meaning – that is the “rishi-state” [sage-state]. Those who are in this state of being and are gods at the same time – they are “devarshis” [divine sages]. Among them, I am “Narada.” The word “Nara” means “Vishnu”; the word “da” means “daan” [giving]. One who gives Vishnu to someone – that is the one who is “Narada.” “Vishnu” is the name for the Omnipresent Consciousness – the Self. The Omnipresent Consciousness is verily Brahman. The one who can initiate one into this Brahman – that one is “Brahman-vid” [the teacher who shows Brahman]. That “Brahman-vid” is “Narada.” “Brahmavid brahmaiva bhavati” [I am the teacher who shows Brahman, and I am Brahman Itself]. Therefore, “Narada” is also “I”.
 
GandharvANAṃ chitrarathah [among “gandharvas” [celestial beings] I am “Chitrarath”] – “gandharva” – “gandh” means aggression, and “arva” means “to go.” The ones go into war because of aggression – meaning: those who intensely do not want to remain in the Mayic worldly experiences after having taken Kriya. The “gandharvas” [celestial musicians] know both “marga” (meaning: from above) and “deshi” (meaning: secular) types of music, and they are adept at teaching these. But they are not at all connected to the usual musical art. Here [in the spiritual realm] too, the seven tones are rising up, making one intoxicated. Some are being understood by the practitioner, some are not. If someone wants to learn, then the knowledgeable sage is able to teach that person up to this point. The sadhaks who have this state of being are called “gandharvas” [celestial musicians]. Among them, [I am] “Chitrarath.” “Chitra” [picture] means “a colorful drawing/painting.” And “rath” [chariot] means a very high resting place (that which can be driven or stopped at will). Just by being a sadhak, one knows this place. If one goes up to that place and sits there, there is no enchantment of Maya. Where there is no enchantment of Maya – the One Who resides there – That is the One Who is called “Chitrarath.” Because “I” do not live in the enchantment of Maya, “I” am “Chitrarath.”
 
Siddha [perfected being] – those who have completed sadhana, for whom there is nothing left to be done, those who are only enjoying the fruits of sadhana – they are the ones who are “siddhas” [perfected ones]. In this state, no vritti [active tendency] of the antahakarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] remains. That is the one who is “muni” [sage with inner silence]. “Munih saṃleenamAnasah” [“muni” is one who has merged his/her mind [in the Self]] – the one for whom all of the happenings of mind have been completely merged [in the Self] – that is the one who is “muni.” When this state comes, the sadhak witnesses the form of “Kapil” in the Sphere by oneself. “Kapil Muni” [a mythological sage] in a previous life, left his body after having fulfilled all aspects of sadhana. Because of this, all that was left for him was to enjoy the fruits of sadhana. Immediately upon taking re-birth, all of the fruits of that sadhana became present in him. That is why he is called “janma-siddha” [perfected right from birth]. There is no birth in “I”. All aspects and attainments of sadhana have finished. There is nothing at all to be done or acted upon. That is why, among “siddhas” [perfected beings], “I” am “Kapil Muni.”
