#### Prose 

आख्याहि मे को भवानुग्ररूपो
नमोऽस्तु ते देववर प्रसीद |
विज्ञातुमिच्छामि भवन्तमाद्यं
न हि प्रजानामि तव प्रवृत्तिम् || 31||
ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo
namo ’stu te deva-vara prasīda
vijñātum ichchhāmi bhavantam ādyaṁ
na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛittim

 #### Bengali Translation 

Who are You – with such a terrifying form? Tell me. I bow to you. O Greatest of gods, be appeased. I want to know You well, O Primal Person, as I do not know anything about Your actions (works). 

 #### Commentary 

Upon experiencing this incredible state, along with excitement, a great longing appears in the sadhak’s mind to know what is beyond the heavy experience [that the sadhak is going through at this time]. With that, there is this understanding. Oh, what is this?! Space is the subtlest of all elements. Through the physical eyes, the sky appears a great distance away with an illusory blue color. But right now, I have my eyes closed. Thus, I am seeing the play of an incredible vision that is far more subtle than space itself. And the One who is swallowing even that extremely subtle vision into His stomach – Who is this One who is subtler and beyond the subtlest? “Akhyahi me” – tell me. “Ko bhavAn ugraroopah” – this fierce form – who are You? Greater than humans are the space/skyresiding gods. You are greater than even them. Therefore, O Greatest of gods! I bow to You! O Greatest of the greatest! I bow to You. “Praseeda” – be appeased; have mercy. “VijnAtumicchhami” – I so want to know. I am unable to comprehend Your beginning, end and middle, Your actions and Your power