#### Prose 

यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत |
अभ्युत्थानमधर्मस्य तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् || 7||
yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata
abhyutthānam adharmasya tadātmānaṁ sṛijāmyaham

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Bharat [Arjuna]! Whenever there is a decaying of dharma and the rising up of “adharma” [non-dharma], I then send forth the Self.

 #### Commentary 

That by the support of which one can exist – that is “dharma” [something to hold]. The jiva's life exists through holding on to the functionalities of the antahkarana. Therefore, the functionalities of the antahkarana is actually the jiva's “dharma.” Antahkarana – “mana” [mind], “buddhi” [intellect], “ahamkar” [ego], “chitta” [personal consciousness; heart] – is divided into these four parts. And [associated with each of them] are four types of vrittis [functionalities] such as “chintan” [pure thought] etc. [The vrittis represent] the carrying out of “dharma.”  Each of these divisions of the antahkarana are associated with each of the yugas [epochs], and each of the vrittis represents each of the segments of dharma. In the direction of creation, chitta is first. Its active aspect or vritti is called “chintan” [pure thought]. After chitta mutates, another vritti grows. That vritti's name is “aham-vritti” [the “I”-vritti]. Then it is called ahamkar. Therefore, ahamkar has two vrittis, chintan and aham-kartritva[“I” and doership]. When ahamkar mutates, another vritti grows. That vritti's name is “nishchayakaran” [faculty of ascertainment]. Then its name is buddhi. Thus, buddhi has three vrittis or dharmas: chintan, aham-kartritva and nishchayakaran. Then when buddhi mutates it is called mana, and another separate vritti grows. That vritti's name is “sankalpa-vikalpa” [volition and non-volition]. Thus, mana has four vrittis or dharmas: chintan, aham-kartritva, nischayakaran and sankalpa-vikalpa. These four vrittis are the four segments of dharma. It is by these that every activity of the antahkarana is carried out. In the path of nivritti [spiritual withdrawal], when one stands forth in the inward direction, the decay, or weakness, or destruction of this dharma takes place, and “adharma” [non-dharma] – meaning: the “abhyutthan” [rising and settling] (“abhi” = at + “ut” = upper + “stha” = settledness) – meaning: settledness happens at the upper place, or right above. It is seen that at first there is the “manahkshetra” [field of mind] or the manomaya kosha [sheath of mind]. Here, the four vrittis such as chintan etc. or the four segments of dharma are fully active. Thus, mind is that which is called “satya” [truth] or Satya-yuga [epoch of satya] (“satya”: “sat” - that which happens + “ya” = that in which there is full existence). Upon becoming devoid of the external world-oriented experience, when mind enters the field of manahkshetra, the sadhak sees that one's Deity of “Narasingha” [God in the form of half-human, half-lion] destroys one's form of “Hiranyakashipu” [a demon-emperor] – or the evil in oneself. Afterwards, after crossing the manahkshetra, one has to come to the “buddhikshetra” [field of intellect] or the “vigyanamaya kosha” [sheath of intellect]. Then the vritti of mana decays or becomes weak. Thus, because of the vritti of mana not being there in the buddhikshetra, there is that much of support-free-ness or [that much of] the coming forth of adharma [non-dharma]. Only three vrittis or segments of dharma remain. This means that there are now three parts dharma and one part adharma. It is for this reason that buddhi is Treta [of three parts] or Treta-yuga [Treta epoch]. In this intellect oriented Treta, the sadhak sees that one's Deity in the form of “Rama” [an incarnation of God] destroys one's form of “Ravana” [a demon-king] – or one's restless nature (the wish to enjoy the desired). After that, having crossed the buddhikshetra, the “ahamkshetra” [the field of ego] or the “anandamaya kosha” [sheath of bliss] is there. Here, because there is no vritti of buddhi, there is that much [more] of support-free-ness or [that much more of] the rising of adharma, and there is only the aham-kartritva and chintan – these two vrittis or segments of dharma present – meaning: there are two parts dharma and two parts adharma. For this reason, the field of ahamkar is that which is called “Dvapara-yuga” [the Dvapara epoch; “dvapara”: of two parts]. In this bliss-filled Dvapara, the cherished Deity appears in the form of Sri Krishna and destroys the sadhak's crooked-toothed “Shishupal” [an arrogant king in the Mahabharata] which is the possessiveness in relations, or “I”-ness. Finally, after crossing the ahamkar, there is the chittakshetra [the field of chitta]. This too is the “anandamaya kosha” [sheath of bliss]. This is because the lower level of the anandamaya kosha is the “I”-ness-filled ahamkar, and the upper level without [ahamkaric] “I”-ness is chitta. In this chittakshetra, only the chintan-vritti is present. None of the other vrittis remain – meaning: here there is one part dharma and three parts adharma. That is why this is called “Kali” or “Kali-yuga” [Kali epoch]. — Begin Footnote. — As far as the ascertainment of substances in the direction of creation, this chitta or Mahat is first. It is first in the antahkarana as well. It is from here that the knowledge of furcation [or: ascertainment of apparent existence] begins (“kal” - “ganana” [ascertain]). That is why it is called “Kali.” — End Footnote. — In this state of Mahat [the great], which devoid of the [ahamkaric] “I”-ness, the Deity of Kalki appears and destroys the sadhak's ignorant nature, which is the seed that manifests samsara. That is what is known as “chitta vritti nirodha” [stopping of the chitta vritti]. Once there is this stopping of the chitta vritti, no vritti at all remains. Nothing to hold on to remains. Then all vrittis are gone. That is verily “vishuddha adharma” [pure non-dharma] — Begin Footnote. — “A” = non-existence of dharma; the state in which no dharma at all remains. — End Footnote. — or the “niralambanavastha” [support-free state]. In this state, Prakriti, as the tri-guna-endowed Maya, is in equilibrium, at home in Brahman, and becomes God. Later, after duality is gone, even Maya does not remain. Only Brahman remains. What That is – that is “avAngmanasoh gocharah” - beyond speech and mind [cannot be spoken about, or conceived by the mind]. — Begin Footnote. — The flow of time for the jiva is divided into two sections according to the differences in pravritti [outward movement] and nivritti [inward movement]. Each section of time is again divided into four parts. Each of those parts is called “yuga” [epoch]. Just as in the external world (in the path of samsara) the current of pravritti flows in this sequence: Satya, Treta, Dvapara, Kali, similarly, in the inner world as well (in the path of sadhana), the nivritti-current flows in this progression of Satya, Treta, Dvapara, Kali. In the path of sadhana, the sadhak – Satya, Treta, Dvapara, Kali – through this sequential progression of yugas – crosses beyond time, and rising upwards in Layayoga [the yoga of merging/dissolution], finds “antime kalau” [state beyond time] – meaning: attains the nivritti-ness [being beyond adjuncts]. The path of samsara is actually the natural movement of cyclical activities in the macrocosm (in the solar system). And, in order to free oneself from those cycles, the activity that is needed to free oneself that is done in the microcosm (within the human body) – that is the path of sadhana! If the human being so desires, he/she can change the current of time within oneself; one does not have to wait for the world's natural changes to come about. Although the current of time is similar in the path of samsara and the path of sadhana, in samsara that [aforementioned] progression distorts/mutates and grows; the prevalence of pravritti increases. In the path of sadhana, the distortions/mutations of that progression end, and an undistorted [or: unchanging] state comes into being. Therefore, in both the path of samsara and the path of sadhana, different kinds of activities are seen in the dharmas of the yugas, according to the divisions of time. It must be remembered: samsara and sadhana are not the same. Samsara – pravritti. Sadhana – nivritti. That which is pleasure in samsara is pain in sadhana. That which is pain in samsara – that is actually the cause of happiness in sadhana. This is because the pleasure that is there in the experience of worldly matters –  with that, knowledge/wisdom disappears. And the pain that comes from being cut away from the worldly experience – that itself causes human beings to endeavor in spiritual search. — End Footnote. —