#### Prose 

मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु |
मामेवैष्यसि युक्त्वैवमात्मानं मत्परायण: || 34||
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
mām evaiṣhyasi yuktvaivam ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Be “madgatachitta” and “madyaji.” Do “namaskar” to Me. Being “matparayan” in this way, merge your chitta [consciousness] into Me, by which you will attain, indeed, Me.

 #### Commentary 

After the completion of “karma” [spiritual practice], and thereby rising up to the Ajna and becoming engaged in “upasana” [spiritual absorption; meditative worship], the five organs of action and the five organs of perception withdraw from the external experience and become contracted within. At that time only the activity of the inner mind – meaning: the activity of the purified antahkarana [personal consciousness] – goes on happening. How that process goes through particular stages, by which one rises from the Ajna to the Sahasrar and becomes “I” – the Lord is closing this chapter by speaking about exactly that.
 
First, one has to be “manmana” [mind on Me; Me-minded] – meaning: the Luminous Sphere that is as brilliant as millions of suns and as peaceful as millions of moons that is revealed when one is in stillness at the Ajna – one has to enter the mind into that [sphere] – meaning: all four parts of the antahkarana [mind, intellect, ego, chitta [personal consciousness]] have to be completely given into that [Light]. Then when the eye of the inner mind connects exactly to the middle of that Light, the last bit of grasping from the antahkarana finishes, and the functionality of certainty becomes strong. At that occurrence, nothing but the Golden Person within that Sphere is perceived. There is only love for that Being. This is the “madbhakta” [devoted to Me] state. If one continues to look with a still and unwavering gaze, that [Golden] Person becomes pleased and His Endless Glories come forth. To look in this way, with a still and unwavering gaze, is the “madyaji” [offered to Me] state. Later, just as when one looks at one object for a long time, the looking ends and one forgets oneself, and then suddenly, like being broken from a trance, that object is seen again – just like that, looking singly at that Golden Person in that state of “madyaji,” one becomes entranced and forgets oneself; even the Person cannot be seen. This happens again and again. This is that which is “namaskar” [reverence/bowing]. That Person is the Limitless One. It is He Who is the Supreme Goal and the Supreme Destination. At this time, because He is the only Refuge, this state is called the “matparayana” [surrendered to Me] state. At the culmination of this state, when no more non-seeing of the Person happens, but there is a Void-Gaze like “I am looking at Him only, yet there is no knowing and known” – this kind of “I do not know how to express it” state happens – that is verily the “yukta avastha” [state of being united]. Even though there is no knowing and known, there is a slight separation between the two [the seer and the Person]. Later, that bit of separation ends and the Seen and seer become One. That One and Only Limitless Being that is “I” – That is all that remains. This is that which is called “attaining ‘I’.”