#### Prose 

यदि ह्यहं न वर्तेयं जातु कर्मण्यतन्द्रित: |
मम वर्त्मानुवर्तन्ते मनुष्या: पार्थ सर्वश: || 23||
yadi hyahaṁ na varteyaṁ jātu karmaṇyatandritaḥ
mama vartmānuvartante manuṣhyāḥ pārtha sarvaśhaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha [Arjuna]! If I become “atandrita” [disengage; unwearied] even once and not remain in action, then all of the “manushya” [people] would follow My way of reversal. 

 #### Commentary 

Now, Srigurudev is showing the sadhak that by being “atandrita” [disengaged; unwearied] — Begin Footnote. — While continuously performing Kriya, if, at the time of coming upon samadhi, the mind takes up the worldly matters and stops acting – if that happens one does not become “ataindrita” [be unwearied; disengaged from the senses]. This is because keeping mind in the worldly experience is “tandra” [drowsiness; weariness]. Keeping the mind in the Self is “jagaran” [being awake]. It is only when Consciousness is taken up at the time of the ending of the mind that the state of “atandrita” [beyond weariness] and non-doing takes place. — End Footnote. —  – meaning: casting off the union with the worldly experience, being firm in intellect, and being separated from action, with all of the various aspects of the vrittis [functionalities] (“manushya” [people]) completely extinguished – the Endlessly Vast, Unmoving State of the Self – that State is attained. Then - “I am All, I am all, there is nothing that is not I” - this type of Awareness comes forth. — Start Footnote. — The reason for this happening is this: when there is the “I”-ness, like the currents becoming active in iron in the presence of a magnet, all of the elements, being under the cover of different sheaths and keeping their particularities distinct, become active in their unique and distinct ways. When the “I”-ness ends, all of the activities come to an end. (Understanding through imagining, or explaining through language, does not give any correct representation. Unless that state is attained, the true feeling of that is not known by the heart.) — End Footnote. —