#### Prose 

सहजं कर्म कौन्तेय सदोषमपि न त्यजेत् |
सर्वारम्भा हि दोषेण धूमेनाग्निरिवावृता: || 48||
saha-jaṁ karma kaunteya sa-doṣham api na tyajet
sarvārambhā hi doṣheṇa dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛitāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kaunteya [Arjuna]! Even if it is with errors, one should not abandon “sahaj karma” [natural rite], because at the beginning of every karma [rite], there is smoke (covering) the fire. 

 #### Commentary 

“Sahaj” – the “jaat” [race; inborn particularities] that comes with birth – “sahaj” has this meaning. What is the karma [act/rite] that is born with birth? The operation of prana/breath is that which is born with birth. That is why the operation of prana/breath is called “sahaj karma.” For as long as the jiva [soul] is in the womb of the mother, it does not have any independent operation of exhalation and inhalation. The operation of prana/breath in its body gets done through the aid of the nadis [subtle passages in the mother and child] connecting the activities going on in the body of the Mother. At that time, the current of prana goes on flowing in a very subtle way in the child’s brahmanadi. It is from that that the seven essences are nourished. As soon as the body is birthed and the operation of exhaling and inhaling begins, right then, the flow of prana-current that was inside connects with the current in the nasal passages and gradually becomes outward-directed. Along with that, the jiva’s dreamlike previous memories are lost. It becomes deludedly captivated with its relationship to the external worldly experience. — Begin Footnote. — That is why the sadhak [saint] Ramprasad has sung: “I was yogi when in the womb, then I fell to the Earth and ate dirt.” This “eating dirt” is becoming deludedly captivated due to the contact with the worldly experience.  — End Footnote. — That is why the aim of yogic practice is to turn that prana-current in the inward direction. This is because only when prana is turned inward that delusion is destroyed; [deeper] memory wakes up, and upon the dawning of the Knowledge of the Self, the world becomes bliss-filled. That inner directed movement of prana is indeed that which is “sahaj karma” [the natural act]. It has become gradually directed towards the outer world because of coming into contact with the worldly experience. Srigurudev, at the time of imparting yogic initiation, turns that current in the inner direction, and reveals the Indivisible Spherical “That” Substance. But that change in the [direction of] the current does not stay for very long. Due to the attack of “vikarma” [residual samsaric magnetism], it [the direction of the current] returns [to the world] very soon afterwards. For this reason, one has to do sadhana [dedicated practice] by oneself. In the beginning, quite a lot of effort has to be made in order to turn that current back in the inner direction. It is not pleasant. And in the beginning, that effort does not always “stick”; one gets kicked off because of the magnetism of the worldly experience. That bit of exertion, that effort to stay with it [but not being able to do so] is that which is being called “error.” That is why the Lord is saying, “Even if [the act is done] with errors, ‘sahaj karma’ (moving prana in the inner direction) should not be abandoned.” This is because no act in its beginning stages is without errors. It is covered with errors, like fire being covered with smoke before rising forth.

So goes the basic subject. Srimat Shankaracharya [a sage] says that “sahaj karma” is that which is “svadharma” [see commentary to 18:47 of the Pranab Gita], and Sridharswami [a sage] says that the act ordained from one’s nature is “sahaj karma.” It can be seen from the descriptions from sloka 42 through 48 regarding the ordained duties of the four castes, as well as the meted out fruits of each of those acts that: “the duty born of one’s nature,” “svadharma,” and “sahaj karma” are just different ways of addressing the same thing. Now we have to see why the duties born of the natures of the four castes – such as brahmin-karma, kshatriya-karma etc. – are called “sahaj karma.”
 
Sridharswami says that the act ordained from one’s nature is that which is “sahaj karma.” It can be seen that, along with changes in the human being’s nature (of the physical and mental states), the operation of prana/breath changes – meaning: however the human being’s nature (of the physical and mental states) is at a certain time, the operation of prana/breath follow that. It is as if it is born anew. It is for this reason that the duties ordained from one’s nature is called “sahaj karma.” Even if the prana/breath activity at that time is with errors, one should not relinquish it. If that is done, then there can be troubles. It is like: when, due to the force of grief, the inner wind grows so much that relentless long breaths try to come out, and the tendency to scream out with tears comes about; with the force of fear, the life-breath contracts and trembles the heart, the chest pulsates heavily; when there is joy, the life-breath springs forth and brings laughter and gladness to the face – all of this is the prana/breath’s acts/duties ordained by nature. If all of these acts are abandoned (suppressed), illnesses rise up in the body. In the same way, the operation of prana/breath becomes calm during deep contemplation. Sitting for a long time and doing Kriya does “samjata” [brings stillness] to the prana-current and does “samjata” [makes it unmoving, inert-like] to the body as well. “If at such time one goes to do some work because of becoming restless due to the pull of something, because of not giving the prana-current enough time to flow freely again – if this happens – one spins and falls down.”4 It can be understood from these small examples that however the operation of prana/breath is, starting up due to the active aspects of one’s nature [at that time] – even if that is known to be with errors, it should not be relinquished. Transforming the operation of prana/breath at that time, changing that operation and thus renouncing the [previous] operation is the reasonable way. Now let us see how in the sadhak’s sadhana-life “sahaj karma,” according to his/her nature, changes and in which ways.

“JanmanA jAyate shudrah saṃskArAdvija uchyate” [at birth one is shudra; initiated teachings make one “dvija” [twice born]; so it is said] – from this statement it can be known that for as long as initiation does not take place – meaning: “upanayan” [thread-ceremony analogous to bar/bas mitzvah] – for that long one is in the state of shudra. “Upanayan” [in this case: eye-opening] can also be said to be “inner sight.” With these two eyes of ours there is no seeing of the matters within. That is why, at the time of initiation, Srigurudev opens a divine eye in the middle of our eyebrows. That is what “upanayan” actually is. One cannot see outside with that eye; [but] if one looks within, one can see many things. That eye’s seeing-power is usually covered up. Through practice after receiving initiation, that covering has to be removed. If one is able to remove the covering, past, future, present – all can be seen through that eye. In scriptures, that eye is described/called by many names such as divine eye, third eye, the eye of knowledge, the eye of intuition etc. Because gurudev opens that eye, it is said in the salutation to guru - “chakshurunmeelitaṃ yena tasmai shreegurave namah” [the one who opens the eye – I bow to that guru].
 
Right after initiation-transmission, shudra-ness goes away and “dvija-ness” [the state of the initiated] comes. This initiation-transmission is called “second birth.” One birth is coming to the outer world on the Earth from the womb of the mother. And another birth is the initiation-transmission, by which there is the leaving of the matters of the outer world and seeing the matters of the inner world. Just as: upon taking birth from the womb of the mother, the operation of the life-breath leaves the way of the inner direction and takes up the direction of the outer world – meaning: with birth, that [outgoing operation of prana/breath] is also “born” – in the same way, as one becomes “dvija” via initiation, along with that, the operation of the prana/breath also changes its form, and gradually goes on becoming inner-directed. It is as if that too has a new birth. It also goes on being born along with [more] births, as there are different stages of being “dvija” – such as brahmin etc. – and according to that, this “sahaj Kriya” [natural Kriya] also takes different forms.
 
Just as there are vrittis [active tendencies] related to the worldly experience that rise up due to the outward flow of prana [vital-force], in the same way, along with prana’s movement turning in the inner direction, many different types of vrittis rise up. And according to those, different types of acts have to be performed. All of those acts nourish and make the operation of the life-breath grow. For this reason, those acts are mandatory. Thus, they are also called “sahaj karma” or “the duties ordained from one’s nature.” In the sadhana-life of every sadhak, there is the experiencing – one by one in sequence – of shudra, vaishya, kshatriya and brahmin – these four states. In every state/stage there are distinct acts that are ordained according to operation of prana/breath. All of those acts are not to be relinquished. If they are relinquished, there is no attainment of higher states. It is only by carrying out those acts, one after another, that there can be the rising up to higher states. And due to the fruits of the performance [of the acts], all of those acts gradually fall off, automatically. Otherwise, if one goes to drop them by one’s own will, one falls.
 
The state of not having Kriya is that which is the shudra-state of the sadhak [practitioner]. The “sahaj karma” or the duties ordained from one’s nature in this state is attendance-oriented. Through attendance or service, it nourishes the other three states. Attendance is: keeping the body with clean habits, using the body in appropriate ways and amounts, giving the body moderate amounts of sattvic food, protecting the body from hostile natural elements, keeping an appropriate living space etc – meaning: following [the teachings in] Chapter 6, sloka 17 [of the Bhagavad Gita] in a reasonable way, and taking care of the operations of the body. Because all of these are acts to help reach Liberation, there are no restrictions to this [group of duties]. It is through these acts of attendance that the body has to be made favorable for sadhana [spiritual practice].
 
The state of doing Kriya is the “dvija” [initiate] state of the sadhak. The first stage in Kriya is the sadhak’s vaishya-condition. The second or middle stage is the kshatriya-condition, and the final stage is the brahmin-condition. These are the three stages of sadhana. The natural duties of the first stage [vaishya] is farming, cattle-raising and trade. These three acts go on happening simultaneously from the very beginning of Kriya. In order to understand [the matter] more easily, the three acts are being explained separately.
 
Sitting with “samaṃ kAyashirogreevam” [body, neck and head aligned], using the breathing operation and drawing the downward-directed force in the body upward, and, keeping the spinal column and all of the body steady and firm, reliance has to be made on the Anahata-chakra. Until this posture is properly locked in, the body is, in essence, “plowed” (farmed) with the aid of vital-air; the instabilities of the spinal column are firmly sealed one after the other, and along with that, one has to offer (place) the seed-mantra in the six chakras according to the proper method. All of these acts comprise “farming.” Then there is “gorakshya” [ordinary meaning: cattle raising/herding; spiritual meaning follows]. “Go” means “sense-organs/organs of operation.” The organs are eleven. Five are dedicated to perception; five are dedicated to action; and one other is mind. These organs have to be kept in control. Fixing the anus, sex organ and feet/legs in the appropriate way in a sitting posture, the hands too have to be fixed in jnana-mudra or some other way of locking them according to guru’s instructions, and the tongue has to be turned back and kept in its own place. Using the method in Chapter 6, sloka 16, the organs of perception and mind have to be subordinated and locked into Kutastha between the eyebrows. After doing this, one has to make sure that no organ is struggling or in pain. This is because “sthirasukhAsanam” – the posture must be steady and comfortable. Pain in any place causes problems with Kriya. Through vigilant effort, one has to become well-practiced in posture, because, in sadhana, the posture is like mother. So goes “gorakshya” [“herding” the organs]. Then there is trade. “Trade” means the “business of prana [vital-force].” The gods love prana slathered with Atma-mantra. The sadhak has to go beyond the world. But it is an unknown land. The road to it is covered with darkness. Some support and help is necessary. So, the sadhak takes the help of a gracious great person (guru), learns how to smear mantra on prana, and thereafter, getting information about roads and barriers on the way to the Abode of Brahman, keeping attention fixed on the direction of the destination, and carrying the mantra-smeared prana, goes about doing business with the gods in the six places on the path of mantra. Good quality products bring a good price. As one does, so is that person’s product. If the gods get good quality prana, they become very satisfied, and if they keep receiving the mantra-covered prana on a regular basis, they become very happy. In exchange for prana, they pay in knowledge and illumination; they show the road, and become helpers. Continuing a good relationship in this way, the Supreme Best becomes the profit. This is “trade.” In the first stage of Kriya, these three karmas [vocations] have to be done. Just as the breath goes on flowing naturally on its own, remaining with that, one has to use a method to connect Atma-mantra to that and do business – meaning: uniting the Atma-mantra and “hangsa/hamsa” to each other, one has to perform the operation of prana/breath (pranayam) in the six chakras. There must not be any force applied on the breath. For as long as the student sadhak is not adept in these three karmas [practices], for as long as the posture is not steady, and the tongue has not turned back and gone inside the throat [inner passage], for that long should one do these acts. And for as long as the learned sadhak, while sitting in Kriya, does not feel an ease within, and if the breath is not easy, subtle and strong, and the attention on Kutastha is not steady – for that long should the sadhak do these practices. If these three practices are not done by remaining natural and without putting any kind of force on the breath, no kind of betterment will take place whatsoever. And if one abandons this way of doing these practices, and one, right from the beginning, puts pressure on the breath and tries to use forceful energy, because all of the paths of the nadis [subtle pathways] are not clean and clear [yet], the force of the vital-air will go to those places, and finding blocks, will disrupt and distort those [places/nadis] and cause illness on the body. The first stage of Kriya is gentle practice. Many, thinking that this gentle sadhana in the first stage is incorrect, try to do sadhana intensely in their own way, without having practiced [the gentle way]. They put pressure on the breath, they forcefully control the breath, make it long, stop it – meaning: they try to do the karma [method] of the second stage of Kriya. The consequence is that they get the opposite results. They end up with deranged afflictions of the head and body and such. That is why [it is said]: “sahajaṃ karma kaunteya sadoShamapi na tyajet” [O Kaunteya [Arjuna], the natural karma [act], even with errors, should not be relinquished], etc.
 
When the karma [aggregate of different practices] of this first stage of Kriya becomes mastered, and breath automatically becomes, subtle, long and powerful, then the student sadhak receives the second Kriya from guru, and the learned sadhak becomes engaged in the practice of the middle stage of Kriya. This middle stage is indeed the “kshatriya condition” of the sadhak. The natural karma [active attributes] of this stage are valiance, energy/power, steadfastness, skill, not fleeing from battle, generosity, and being in the state of “lord.” This stage is the intensely difficult stage of the sadhak. Having cleared up all of the nadis from the practices of the first stage, the sadhak has to, [only] according to guru’s instructions, apply force on the breath. The vital-air has to be moved through different nadis. With the help of inner strength, the pains of sadhana have to be tolerated. Applying adeptness and skill, and taking the help of discrimination, detachment and such, one has to stop the powerful attacks of lust, anger greed and such – the supporters of the desirous worldly experiences. In no way should one retreat. By doing Kriya in this way, lust, anger and such – all such are conquered. And gradually, many places in the kingdom of this body come under one’s control. Many types of powers are attained. [But] when powers are attained, one must not become attached to them and [must not] enjoy them. Enjoyment brings bondage. Ascension does not happen. While remaining totally unattached to everything, one has to offer everything to the Lord and go on. This is “charity/generosity.” This remaining unattached and not falling into the bondage of enjoyment – due to this, the Influence of the Self spreads all over the powers of Prakriti. This is the state of “lord.” The [Bhagavad] Gita’s sadhak Arjuna is engaged in this Kriya of the middle stage. Seeing the difficult nature of this intense duty to be done, he decides that the karma [duties] of the final stage of Kriya is better. That is quite a peaceful state (meaning: Sahasrar Kriya, learned from guru’s mouth). In that state, there is no relationship to the five elements. The mind stays in the Knowledge-filled Bliss of Brahman in the Sahasrar. No efforts of the six chakras remain at all. Not even rulership remains. Having what it has always desired, the mind is content. Having this “being content upon having the desired thing” in mind, Arjuna says, “shreyobhoktuṃ bhaikshyamapeeha loke” [better to eat from begging for alms in this world]. That Arjuna is trying to go to the state of Knowledge by abandoning the state of karma [yogic practice] – that wish of his is useless. The reason is: without performing that intense karma, one cannot stay in that state of Knowledge. One has to come down because of still being under the power of Prakriti, and thus one has to, with absolute certainty, engage in action. The reason for this [Bhagavad] Gita is verily to understand this.
 
The Lord is saying “sahajaṃ karma kaunteya sadoShamapi na tyajet” [O Kaunteya [Arjuna], the natural karma [act], even with errors, should not be relinquished]. In this middle stage of sadhana, the sadhak is looking at Kutastha Chaitanya, and is standing between the two groups of vrittis [good and bad active attributes]. [Arjuna’s] road is completely clear. The bow has been drawn – meaning: the spinal column has been made as steady and straight as possible. With that, a sharp arrow is also attached there – meaning: the breath within the spine has become subtle and intense/quickened. Now, that can be shot anywhere, unobstructed, and one can pierce whatever one wants. In this state, there is no other action to do other than valiance/heroism, power and such. That is actually the “sahaj karma” of this time. Now, if the sadhak does not use that intense/quickened subtle breath in the appropriate way through valiance and power and such, and, upon abandoning that, goes to perform brahmin-karma at the Sahasrar, that is not going to be possible. This is because the Kriya of that intense/subtle breath has now begun, and cannot be ended without going through it. One cannot relinquish karma [duty; or: action and its fruit] by just wishing to relinquish karma. Because of the power of Prakriti, one will be compelled helplessly to be bound even more to the actions born of one’s nature. It is only through performing Kriya in a detached way that karma [all meanings of the word] is relinquished automatically. Using desire only brings bondage. Emancipation does not happen. That is why the Lord says later, “kartṛm necchhasi yanmohAt karShyasyavasho’pi tat” [you will be helplessly made to do that out of attachment]. For this reason, He is teaching now that one should, with unattached mind at all times, do all duties, and worship God [while doing the duties]. It is when that is done that perfection will be attained. One should not abandon “sahaj karma” [natural yoga] even if it is with errors. This is because that is the only path of ascension. Just as the only way to prepare the necessary rice and such is with fire/heat, but in order to light that fire the natural smoke will appear without fail, just as that fire is not something to be abandoned regardless of that [smoke] – in the same way, all acts are covered with errors in the beginning stages. Therefore, even if “sahaj karma” is with errors, it is not something to be abandoned.
 
The moving of prana is the activity with which the jiva [person] is born. Just because it [the activity] has mingled with the worldly experience and has become erroneous, that does not mean that this activity is to be abandoned. Just as smoke covers fire – in the same way, because of the errors coming forth from (the contact with) the starting up of “sarva” [all – meaning: phenomena], the door to the true nature of this karma [particular duty] in the path of Brahman is being kept covered. Just as when the fire gains a little strength, the smoke is chased away and the fire’s own form is revealed – similarly the activity with which one is born too, traveling on the guru-revealed path, casts away the web of Prakritic Maya, and places oneself in one’s True Being.