#### Prose 

भक्त्या मामभिजानाति यावान्यश्चास्मि तत्त्वत: |
ततो मां तत्त्वतो ज्ञात्वा विशते तदनन्तरम् || 55||
bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaśh chāsmi tattvataḥ
tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā viśhate tad-anantaram

 #### Bengali Translation 

Through (that supreme) devotion, the way that I am (all-pervading) and the form [that I am] (the deepest Existence-Consciousness-Bliss) – [that person] truly knows Me in that way. After that, knowing Me truly, when that knowledge comes to its peak, [that being] enters Me.

 #### Commentary 

The separate and many “I”-s that you are seeing that I have created from the titled/attributed versions of the “I-aham” – upon having unmoving faith in guru’s words and practicing Kriya, and thereby continuously washing the space of personal consciousness, when all of those separate “I”-s are erased, upon knowing the [Reality that is] all-title-free, devoid of duality and non-duality, One Essence, Deep Consciousness, Primal, Unconquerable, Immortal, Infinite, and knowing that there is no place for a second “I” besides this “I”, the sadhak will be free of doubts. It is then that the sadhak will “mAmabhijAnati” [come to know Me] – meaning: in the form of the knower of the field, one will oneself see Oneself. There will be no place in the antahkarana for an opposing situation/perception. Wherever there is whatever amount of water – all of that is in the bosom of the sea. The recognition of separateness in the separate selves will not be there. The illusion of substances, Prakriti, Maya etc. will completely disappear. Know that this is that which is “tattvatojnAtvA” [having known in truth]. After this, the sadhak proceeds to gradually become the Expanse. It is like: I have my feet in two boats. As soon as I take my foot off of one boat, I immediately take refuge in one boat alone. It is like this.