#### Prose 

आयु:सत्त्वबलारोग्यसुखप्रीतिविवर्धना: |
रस्या: स्निग्धा: स्थिरा हृद्या आहारा: सात्त्विकप्रिया: || 8||
āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya-sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ
rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛidyā āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The diet that: aids in the expansion of lifespan, sattvic-strength, freedom from illness, happiness and satisfaction; [and] is succulent, gentle [for digestion], steadying and good for the mind/heart are preferred by the sattvic ones.

 #### Commentary 

“Ayu” [lifespan] = the time that exists between birth and death. “Sattvabala” [sattvic-strength] = that which promotes purity, uprightness, righteousness, compassion, devotion, magnanimity, cleanliness etc. – this kind of power/energy. “Arogya” [non-illness] = health. “Sukha” [happiness] = that, when had, there is no desire remaining to get anything else. “Preeti” = satisfaction. [The diet] that nurtures these [is sattvic]. “Rasya” [ordinary meaning: succulent] = the word “rasa” refers [in this case] to the reproductive essence. Those [foods] that increase the reproductive essence – that is “rasya” – such as: milk and such – “sadya veerya karo dugdham” [milk promotes instant potency]. “Snigdha” [gentle; smooth – in this case: for digestion] = that which does not cause any agitation in the body and keeps the body feeling tranquil, and helps the growth of marrow [or: helps to fortify the brain] – such as: ghee [clarified butter], new skin of boiled milk, husked rice, barley, sesame etc. “Sthira” [steadying] = medicinal – foods that work like medicines – like: mother’s milk, parval [a very small squash], the leaves of parval, sugar-cane etc. “Hridya” [good for the mind/heart] = that which increases the operative power [the power to be certain] of the intellect – such as: brahmi leaves, helencha [a type of swamp weed], pennywort etc. And sweet fruits, sugar from sugar-cane, rice with milk and sugar, rice with ghee etc. help sattva guna to grow. The people with high qualities like these foods.