#### Prose 

आदित्यानामहं विष्णुर्ज्योतिषां रविरंशुमान् |
मरीचिर्मरुतामस्मि नक्षत्राणामहं शशी || 21||
ādityānām ahaṁ viṣhṇur jyotiṣhāṁ ravir anśhumān
marīchir marutām asmi nakṣhatrāṇām ahaṁ śhaśhī

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among the “Adityas,” I am “Vishnu,” among all lights, the “Angshumali” Sun, and among the “Maruts,” I am “Marichi.” Among the celestial bodies, I am “Chandra” [Moon].

 #### Commentary 

“Aditya” – the one by whom all lack is fulfilled – that one is “Aditya.” The reflected light of Consciousness that shines at the junction area of Mahat and Avyakta – because that [reflection] is called the first manifestation of Maya, it is named “Aditya” [the first]. Through the use of sambhavi, this Aditya can be seen in twelve parts. They are: “Bhaga,” “Angsha,” “Aryama,” “Mitra,” “Varuna,” “Savita,” “Dhata,” “Vivasvan,” “Tashta,” “Pusha,” “Indra” and “Vishnu.” Among these twelve, it is “Vishnu” Who is “savitṛmaNDalamadhyavartee nArAyaNah hiraNmayavapu” [Lord Narayana in Golden Form situated in the center of the sun-like orb]. In that Heart of that Inner Aditya [see second sentence of this commentary] – meaning: when the Star that is in exactly the middle [of the radiance] bursts – the eight-petaled lotus that is seen after that – it is above that lotus that the Golden Person is seen. The color that comes forth when melted gold is stirred – that Person’s color is just like that. That is why the name “Hiranmaya” [golden] is used. He is “hiraNyashmashru” [with golden beard] and “hiraNyakesha” [golden-haired]. His nails and everything is golden in Him. — Begin Footnote. — “atha yadevaitadAtyasya shuklaṃ bhAh saiva sAtha yanneelaṃ parah kṛShNaṃ tadamastatsAmAtha ya eSho’ntarAditye hiraNmayah puruSho dṛshyate hiraNyashmashrurhiraNyakesha ApraNasvAtsarva eva suvarNah.” Chhandogya Upanishad; 1st Chapter. 1.6.6. — End footnote. — It is He Who is Vishnu. That Vishnu is verily, “I” – meaning: the first mutation of Ancient Mahamaya.

The one that is “Angshumali Ravi” [radiant sun] (“raṃ” – revelation/light; “i” – power; “vaṃ” – space/void; the power that brings light in the void) in the zodiac – “I” am that as well. “Marut” [air/wind] (“m” – dying + “ut” [pulled out]) – meaning: pulling this one out causes death. Among the “Maruts,” “I” am “Marichi” – meaning: prana [life-force].
 
“Nakshatra” [ordinary definition: star; celestial body] – meaning: that which has no destruction [when the word “nakshatra” is broken down etymologically, the meaning is that which cannot be destroyed] – meaning: “amrita” [nectar of immortality; ambrosia]. This nectar is in “Shashi” [Moon]. That is why “I” am the Moon.