#### Prose 

देहिनोऽस्मिन्यथा देहे कौमारं यौवनं जरा |
तथा देहान्तरप्राप्तिर्धीरस्तत्र न मुह्यति || 13||
dehino ’smin yathā dehe kaumāraṁ yauvanaṁ jarā
tathā dehāntara-prāptir dhīras tatra na muhyati

 #### Bengali Translation 

The kinds of mutations of conditions – such as childhood, youth, old age – that are there for this (physical) body of the jiva – it is the same after the end of the body. Therefore, a person who is “dheera” [steady and composed] does not get deluded by that.

 #### Commentary 

Like the way different kinds of conditions come about one after the other for this [physical] body (yet no change happens to the embodied one; one stays as one is) – in the same way, the different kinds of bodies that one receives after death according to the state of consciousness at the time of death – such as demi-god, human, mammal, bird etc. - those different kinds of bodies that are received are also the same thing (the change is only in the condition and appearance; the jiva's “jiva-ness” does not go away; that remains just as it is. In this, [the person who is] “dheera” — Begin Footnote. — “VikArahetau sati vikriyante yeShAṃ na chaitAṃsi ta eva dheerAh” - meaning: the one who does not vary his/her state [get disturbed] even when a cause for the varying of the state [cause for disturbance] is present – that is the one who is called “dheera” [steady and composed]. — End Footnote. — (“dhee” = intellect; the “ra” substance [or: the linguistic root “ra”] = to hold – meaning: one who attains settledness in the field of the intellect – that particular person) does not become deluded. Applying the “vritti of certainty,” that person ascertains Sat and asat, and takes his/her place in Sat alone. That person does not fall into the delusion of asat.