#### Prose 

ज्ञेयं यत्तत्प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वामृतमश्रुते |
अनादिमत्परं ब्रह्म न सत्तन्नासदुच्यते || 13||
jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣhyāmi yaj jñātvāmṛitam aśhnute
anādi mat-paraṁ brahma na sat tan nāsad uchyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

I am speaking about that which is to be known, knowing which, immortality is attained. That is the Beginning-less Supreme Brahman. It cannot be said to be either “sat” [existent] or “asat” [non-existent].

 #### Commentary 

Through analysis, the sadhak [aspirant] has surmised what “field” and “knowledge” are. Now, the sadhak has come to understand what is the final culmination of knowledge – meaning: that thing that is to be known, the substance that is to be known. The word “jneya” means “the object of knowledge” [or: “the thing that is to be known”]. Whatever there is that can be seen in this world – all of that is indeed with beginning and with end – meaning: they follow the way of creation-preservation-destruction. The object of knowledge for those who follow the way of creation-preservation-destruction is That which has no creation-preservation-destruction – That Itself. This is because whatever whoever is – that person automatically knows oneself quite well. That which is not known by someone – that is of course “the thing to be known” for that being. That is why I am saying: those who are of the dharma of death, [of the experiences that] have beginnings and have ends – for them, “the thing to be known” is That – that which is Beginning-less, Invincible [or: Birth-less], Immortal. Knowing which, this suffering of birth and the fear of death – these disappear. And so, gather up the inner functionalities of the worldly experience, and burn the flow of thought with that Boundless, Beginning-less, Infinite-ness [Brahman], like a clump of iron being in fire. It is when this happens that the jiva [individual soul] is delivered from birth and death, and, because of attaining Brahman-ness, attains Immortality. That Brahman is Alone. It is neither “sat” [existent] nor “asat” [non-existent]. (This is because if either “sat” or “asat” is said, duality is implied. That which is without duality or non-duality – That is verily Brahman.)