#### Prose 

तस्माच्छास्त्रं प्रमाणं ते कार्याकार्यव्यवस्थितौ |
ज्ञात्वा शास्त्रविधानोक्तं कर्म कर्तुमिहार्हसि || 24||
tasmāch chhāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te kāryākārya-vyavasthitau
jñātvā śhāstra-vidhānoktaṁ karma kartum ihārhasi

 #### Bengali Translation 

For that reason, “shastra” [scripture] is your “pramana” [standard; proof; guide] about that which is do be done and that which is not to be done. Here, knowing the actions that have been prescribed by the scriptures, engage in (sadhana).

 #### Commentary 

In the commentary to the previous slokas [verses] [of this Chapter 16 of the Pranab Gita], the word “shastra” has been explained. In this sloka, it is being said that shastra is the guide/standard for determining that which is to be done and that which is not to be done. So, a little more detailed understanding of shastra [meaning: what shastra is] is necessary. By getting to know [what shastra is a little better], the sadhak will be able to take into his/her heart a deeper knowledge of this sloka [16:24].
 
In the previous commentary [to sloka 16:23 of the Pranab Gita] it was said that vayu [vital-air as a whole] rules the body; it is operating all of the functions of the body through the five pranas [particular vital-airs]. Thus, in the body, it is vayu that is “shastra.” In this [Bhagavad] Gita there is [the statement] “vAyuh sarvatrago mahAn” [vayu is primary in all] (Chapter 9, sloka 6). All of the functionalities of the senses, and even the activities of mind, intellect, ego and chitta [personal consciousness] are under the power of the operations of vayu. In this body, if one takes refuge in vayu and becomes a co-worker with it – meaning: upon doing Kriya using the power of vayu, with a devotedly tender heart – if one is able to make vayu equalized and subtle and bring it under one’s control, one can become the knower of all scriptures and be all-knowing. Adorned with all divine glories, one can attain Brahman-ness. In sutra [literary “thread”] 3 of the Prashnopanishad [a scripture] it is said: “prANAgnaya evaitasmin, pura jAgrati” – meaning: fire in the form of prana-vayu is indeed the living guru within the body. The Kriya of this vayu is called “Brahmavidya” [Brahman-knowledge]. This is because vayu itself is Brahman. In Taittireeya Upanishad [a scripture] it is said: “namaste vAyo tvameva pratyaksha brahmAsi tvameva pratyakshaṃ vadiShyAmi ṛtaṃ vadiShyAmi satyaṃ vadiShyAmi tanmAvatu” [I bow to you - vayu, you indeed are the perceivable Brahman; I proclaim that you indeed are the perceivable Brahman; I proclaim the Divine Order; I proclaim the Truth; may I be absorbed in that Truth].
 
Vayu has two qualities – sound and touch. The gurus say that if vayu moves through the subtle-nadi path, there is an experience of coolness in the seven layers of the skin. Feeling the pleasure of an inexpressible touching, bliss gathers in the mind, and many types of sound rise up within. All of those sounds gradually become transformed into “naad” [divine sound], and from naad, various types of waves of speech begin to flow. If one fixes one’s chitta [personal consciousness] in those waves of speech, shruti [Vedas and Upanishads], smriti [all other scriptures] and such [scriptures] – all matters of knowledge can be heard. All of these scriptures of knowledge actually arise via vayu, and because the world operates according to that knowledge, those shrutis [scriptures] and smritis [scriptures] are also called “shastra” [directives]. The compassionate sages and seers have written down that knowledge with the name of “shastra[s]” in many different forms of books. — Begin Footnote. — That is why it is set up like this: whichever discipline one does, one will be [or: is] practicing the shastra [scripture] related to that discipline. If that happens, one will come to know about the thing that one is practicing. “Yat yat shastraṃ samabhAset tat tat vrataṃ samAcharet” [translation of this Sanskrit statement is already provided in the first sentence of this footnote after the colon [:]]. — End Footnote. — Not only is [knowledge] heard [from naad], [but] from the center of that naad, a light shines forth. In that light, all of the happenings of past and future can be seen. Thus, vayu makes the sadhak all-knowing and all-seeing. And it also keeps the sadhak’s knowledge disciplined.

So there we have the description of what shastra is. How this shastra in the form of vayu is the standard/guide regarding the situations of what is to be done and what is not to be done – let us look at that. “Pramana” [proof; standard; guide] means that which brings certainty. Srimat Shankaracharya [a sage] said that the meaning of “pramana” means “knowledge,” [or] “sadhana” [endeavor to know]. Whether or not a particular thing is to be done or not to be done – in order to know that, in order to be sure about that – shastra is that which provides that certainty. This is because “shastra” – meaning: vayu, the ruler of the body, by becoming concentrated in the field of buddhi [intellect], activating the intellectual powers, and illuminating the buddhi, reveals that which is to be done and that which is not to be done. Those who have progressed a little bit in the path of sadhana – they know about this wondrous power of vayu. It can be seen that the kinds of states that ordinarily manifest within our inner beings during the waking state – when one sits in asana [meditation posture] and does Kriya, as vayu enters the subtle path even a little bit, all of those states no longer stay settled in our inner beings. It can even be experienced that the mind is agitated, nothing feels good, one does not want to stay in one place – if in this kind of state you turn around the movement of the body’s vayu, and, upon placing mind on vayu, drive vayu in the direction of Kutastha – then, with the turning around of vayu’s movement, the mind’s previous state [of agitation] becomes transformed. Vayu then goes on to move within the subtle path, and immediately, there is a wondrous change that happens to the mind. The mind perceives many things. All kinds of good and bad states from all kinds of times rise up in the mind. It is as if the mind rethinks about all of those states anew. Such is the intense force of the impressions left by previous experiences! After this, when vayu becomes equalized, it can be seen that the outer states no longer enter inside. The inner mind becomes drawn only to the happenings within. (Even extremely novice sadhaks feel and know this.) Not only that – when vayu becomes subtle, it becomes possible to direct vayu to wherever one wishes; one can make it concentrated as well. At that time, it can be seen that in particular places of the inner being, vayu brings about particular states. Even this: if the mind intensely desires to know something, vayu becomes one with that desire and becomes filled with consciousness, and after making the mind settled, steady and locked in a place of attention, [it is suddenly experienced that] someone just said something – this kind of non-embodied/untraceable voice tells the mind about the matter to be known. The uttering of that divine declaration, and the mind hearing that declaration – it works like lightning, startling the practitioner. And right upon hearing that, the mind becomes completely satisfied. There is nothing that remains to be understood, nor some little doubt here and there – none of that is there. The mind becomes totally, doubtlessly, fully certain about that matter. Such is the power of that [untraceable] utterance. Thus, in order to ascertain the situations of that which is to be done or not done, or that which is dutiful or not dutiful – dear sadhak, take recourse in the shastra in the form of vayu. It is shastra that will give you the guidance. It will prove to you with certainty what is dutiful and what is not dutiful. — Begin Footnote. — Just as without being knowledgeable in the scriptures, it is not possible to open up a scripture and prove a certain matter or analyze it, and then, [just as] one has to learn the proof in the scripture from someone who is knowledgeable in the scriptures – in the same way, for as long as the sadhak is not knowledgeable in the scriptures – meaning: [for as long as the sadhak] is not able to be adept at knowing scripture in the form of vayu – for that long the spoken word of guru is the guide regarding the situations of that which is to be done and that which is not to be done. The words from guru’s mouth and that non-embodied utterance within are one and not two different things. That non-embodied declaration is also guru’s teaching. This is because it is the operation of vayu. Vayu is itself guru. Because fire is the guru of the spiritually initiated, it is described in the Upanishads that the totality of prana is fire – [unclear print for the Sanskrit reference]. The world is itself prana-filled – “prANo hi bhagavAneeshah prANo viShNuh pitAmahah; prAneNa dhAryate lokah sarvaṃ prANamyaṃ jagat” [prana is indeed the Divine Lord, prana is Vishnu grandfather; prana is the support of the worlds [or: of people], all creation is filled with prana]. — End Footnote. — Scripture in the form of vayu will clearly show you the Brahman-Substance and give you the knowledge of the universe.

There is another way to know that shastra/scripture is the standard or the provider of certainty regarding that which is to be done and that which is not to be done. The activities of sattva, rajas, tamas – these three gunas [primal qualities], and earth, water, fire, air, ether – these five elements are not the same at all times in the body. At particular times, a particular guna and a particular element are more strongly active [than others]. The activities of each guna and each element bring forth different kinds of results. At the time of doing some work, upon knowing the possible results and non-results of that work, in order to ascertain if that work is to be done or not to be done – if one sees which guna and which element are operating [more strongly] in the body at that time, one can know. Every guna and every element has different colors. By seeing that, which guna and which element are more active at that time can be known. Sattva, rajas and tamas – these three gunas appear as three bindus [bindu = visible point/single dot/single spot] inside a triangular form [seen within]. The rajo-bindu is seen in the left corner of that triangle. Its name is “vama,” and its color is red (like blood). The sattva-bindu is seen in the top corner. Its name is “jyeshtha” and its color is white (like moonlight). The tamas-bindu is seen in the right corner and its name is “raudri,” and its color is black (like kohl). The color of earth is yellow; the color of water is pale green; the color of fire is red (like burning charcoal); the color of air is jungle-green (the color of smoke can also be seen in the air-element), and the color of ether is “asmani” [sky-blue/sky-color] (like in the sky). Vayu itself reveals all of these colors in Kutastha. If vayu is pulled up according to the guru-instructed method and attention is placed in Kutastha, the guna that is strong in the body [at that time] – its bindu, and the element that is operating [more strongly at that time] – its color, can be seen. It is by seeing these that yogis know the result and non-result of actions, and determine what is to be done and not done. If the color of earth [yellow] is seen, then it should be understood that the result will be quick, beneficent, safe etc. If the color of water [pale green] is seen, then it should be understood that getting a result is doubtful. If the color of fire [red, like burning charcoal] is seen, then it should be understood that there will not be any result. If the color of air [jungle-green, or the color of smoke] is seen, then it should be understood that the result may be good, but even if that happens, it will not be long-lasting. If the color of ether [sky-blue; sky-color] is seen, then it should be understood that there will be fruit, but slowly [or: after a long time]. The three bindus of the three gunas that can be seen in the triangular form [within] – among them, the guna that is more strong [at a particular time] – the bindu of that guna becomes clear; it becomes bright. When you see the light of rajoguna, then action will take place; dharma [righteousness; religion] will be attained, because “vama” is the dharma-bestowing shakti [power]. When you see the light of sattva guna, then do only the work of earning/money. The fruit of that will be obtained, because “jyeshtha” is the wealth-bestowing shakti. And when the light of tamoguna is seen, then if there is the endeavor to do the action of sexual desire, the desired fruits will be obtained, because “raudri” is the shakti that bestows the fulfillment of sexual desires. When these three bindus meet and become one, the Sri-Bindu is seen in the middle of that triangle. She is the Liberation-bestowing shakti.

As the sadhak goes on to rise to higher and higher fields in sadhana, along with that, the thorns on the path of his/her advancement (the functional forces of enmity) are seen. If an opposing active force is not destroyed immediately upon seeing it, one cannot rise any farther; the advancement is blocked. At that time, the rightful place to which the sadhak has reached – he/she has to know the particular action/rite that has to be performed according to the nature of that place, and then has to perform that act and destroy that enemy. The Lord is giving attention to the appropriate karma [act] that has to performed in the rightful place when, in Chapter 18 [of the Bhagavad Gita], He says, “sahajaṃ karma kaunteya sadoShatamapi na tyajet.” The meaning of this will be explained in the appropriate place.
 
“DevAn bhAvayatAnena” [the demi-gods, having been pleased] etc. – this ancient scriptural directive – when obstacles appear to impede the carrying out of these directives – in order to remove those obstacles, there are several procedures. Knowing those procedures at the appropriate times, one has to perform karma [acts] according to that. Gurudev is the one who teaches that to the sadhak. Upon becoming engrossed [in spiritual practice], and practicing Kriya with the usual method, as the sadhak gains the right to enter within, he/she comes to know from gurudev, one after another: the second Kriya, the third Kriya, the fourth Kriya and such other different Kriyas, along with certain practices to specifically make things more facilitating in sadhana – such as ida-pingala-shodhan-Kriya, granthi-bheda-Kriya and many such different Kriyas – and practices all of them. With that, the obstacles are destroyed, and along with spiritual advancement, many types of glorious attainments go on being actualized. There is a certain special way as far as the method of performing those Kriyas. This is because in all of those Kriyas, an effort has to be made on the breath according to guru’s instructions. The breath has to be gradually made long. The vayu has to be pulled up and put down steadily but with great intensity. The time of stillness between exhalation and inhalation has to be increased. The breath has to be drawn up and then put down sometimes from the throat or sometimes from the palate. When one becomes accomplished with these Kriyas, as the paths of all of the nadis become clear/clean, the path of sadhana becomes free of thorns [obstacles], and the possibility of the pain of death at the time of death, which can make one unsteady and lose oneself, is also taken away.
 
Now let us see at which kind of rightful place the sadhak Arjuna, as described in the [Bhagavad] Gita, is situated at present. He is the crest-jewel of sadhana of the kshatriyas [warriors]. Now, he is sitting on a chariot, ready for battle in front of enemies in Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra. He had raised his bow at the time that the weapons would begin to be used. [And then this happened:] “aham mameti” [they [the enemies] are mine] – he become overcome by the delusion of samsara. And being filled with grief, he threw down the weapons, abandoned his power of kingship, fell into the drawing power of tamoguna (of Prakritic tamas), and became completely confused as to what to do. That is why the Lord, in the form of sattva guna, is dispelling Arjuna’s delusion with the light of Self-Knowledge. He is saying “iha shAstravidhAnoktaṃ karma jnAtvA kartuṃ arhasi” [you should know the scripturally advised act and should do it]; “sahajaṃ karma kaunteya sadoShamapi na tyajet” [do not abandon the natural act [that should be done], O Kaunteya [Arjuna] even if it is imperfectly done]. This means: you are a kshatriya [of the warrior caste]; in you, rajoguna is primary but mixed with sattva guna. You are ready to do battle in the field of war, the playground of kshatriyas. This rightful place in which you are established – in this [place,] your natural karma [set of actions] is valor, power, fortitude, adeptness, not running from battle, generosity and godliness. These are the prescribed karma [ways of doing and being] as said in the scriptures. There is no one better than you who can do this karma. If you abandon this natural activity of yours, and take refuge in tamoguna and become deluded, then – “adhogacchhanti tAmasAh” [the tamasic go in the downward direction] – following this statement, you will fall to the lower levels [of existence]. Therefore, take up valor, power, fortitude etc., and practice the prana-moving Kriya according to the proper procedure[s]. Destroy the lowly forces of latent desires that oppose the subtle-prana [alternate translation: destroy the opposing, lowly forces of latent desires in the form of subtle energies]. 