#### Prose 

श्रेयान्स्वधर्मो विगुण: परधर्मात्स्वनुष्ठितात् |
स्वभावनियतं कर्म कुर्वन्नाप्नोति किल्बिषम् || 47||
śhreyān swa-dharmo viguṇaḥ para-dharmāt sv-anuṣhṭhitāt
svabhāva-niyataṁ karma kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣham

 #### Bengali Translation 

It is better to do “svadharma” [one’s ordained life-path] imperfectly than to perform another’s dharma [life-path] well. No one incurs sin by doing duty born of one’s nature. 

 #### Commentary 

The duty born of one’s nature, or “svakarma” [one’s ordained duty] is being called “svadharma” [one’s ordained life-path] here. Thus, the duty born of one’s nature for the brahmin – brahmin-karma – is the svadharma of the brahmin. The natural duty of the kshatriya – kshatriya-karma – is the kshatriya’s svadharma. The natural duty of the vaishya – vaishya-karma – is the svadharma of the vaishya. And the natural duty of the shudra – shudra-karma – is the svadharma of the shudra. These four castes that are there – for any one caste of these four castes, the dharma of the other three castes is “paradharma” [the others’ dharma]. The word “viguna” [imperfect] means “with errors.” Concluding that the act of killing the elders gathered opposite to him in war is “viguna” [incorrect] – meaning: with errors or sinful, the sadhak Arjuna decided that the beggarly way is the way that can be properly enacted [due to the situation] – meaning: it would be commotion-free, peaceful and sinless. But “guNadoShadṛshirdoShah guNastu bhayavarjitah” – meaning: to see error is itself an error; to see virtue is also an error; seeing none of either error or virtue – that is the real virtue – Arjuna did not bring this into his understanding. He saw his “svadharma” of killing enemies in war as erroneous, and the “paradharma” of beggarliness as virtuous. That is why the Lord made him look at the dharma of his caste and said, “Even if others’ dharma is carried out well, the imperfect performance of one’s own dharma is better.” This is because: that seeing of error in one’s own dharma and see virtue in another’s dharma – that is the operation of egotism. Egotism tightens the bindings of karma. And again, if, due to the power of egotism, one’s own dharma is relinquished, then one is always bound to the impressions of errors and virtues. At the time of death, those impressions are awakened by the mind in the chitta [general personal consciousness], and make one take on a thinking state according to that. And therefore, instead of going beyond thinking states and attaining Emancipation, one has to wander about and around in the bondage of samskaras [impressions]. For this reason, the Lord is saying, “Not seeing errors and virtue, and staying to one’s own duty with always having an unattached mind, and worshipping that Ruler of all, there is the attainment of perfection.” Sin does not touch one if one is doing the duty born of one’s own nature. No matter what the duty born of one’s nature is, it is the fruit of one’s own previously done actions. It is now standing there in the form of “prarabdha [karma]” [fruits bound from the previous actions]. Thus, without experiencing that with detachment, that will not be destroyed. This is the reason that one’s own dharma is better than another’s dharma.
 
In this chapter [18], the Lord, having shown the states of the four castes of sadhana to the sadhak Arjuna, is engaging him to his “svadharma” [Arjuna’s own way according to his caste]. This commentary has been written in accordance with the following of the dharmas of the castes of sadhana. (See the commentary to the next sloka [18:48].) The way in which the commentary has been directed regarding “svadharma” and “paradharma” in Chapter 3 [of the Pranab Gita] – the sadhak should also be attentive of that. The reason: resultantly it is the same for both. That is why that commentary too is mentioned here.
 
“Viguna” [in this case: beyond the gunas] – “vigata guna” [when the gunas are gone], “nistraigunya” [devoid of the three gunas] (Chapter 2, sloka 45 [of the Bhagavad Gita]) – meaning: after merging, the Settlement in Brahman that is there – that is “svadharma” [one’s true way]. If one is not able to stay locked in it, coming down after the breaking of samadhi and again working and making effort to get samadhi – the coming and going is also better [than going to the worldly experience]. But “paradharma” [not one’s true way] – meaning: performing Prakritic dharma beautifully – meaning: remaining only with the functions of the forms of the worldly experience – is not better. And that Kriya that I am doing in order to attain that Settledness in Brahman (remaining with attention on Brahman at that time) – that is called “svabhavaniyata karma” [action that is ever connected to one’s true nature]. In this state, even if there is contact with the three gunas, one does not fall to the powers of Prakriti. To succumb to the powers of Prakriti is actually that which is called “sin.” (See Chapter 3, sloka 35; Chapter 5, sloka 10 [of the Bhagavad Gita].)