#### Prose 

शनै: शनैरुपरमेद्बुद्ध्या धृतिगृहीतया |
आत्मसंस्थं मन: कृत्वा न किञ्चिदपि चिन्तयेत् || 25||
śhanaiḥ śhanair uparamed buddhyā dhṛiti-gṛihītayā
ātma-sansthaṁ manaḥ kṛitvā na kiñchid api chintayet

 #### Bengali Translation 

(The yogi,) through patient intellect, must slowly and steadily desist [from the worldly experience]. Settling the whole of the mind completely in the Self, [the yogi] should not think about anything at all.

 #### Commentary 

Applying the intellect patiently – meaning: being alert to whether Kriya is happening exactly as per guru's teachings or not – one has to, slowly and steadily, do “uparati” [desist] – meaning: the mind has to be withdrawn from the worldly experience. “Dheere dheere” - [slowly and steadily] – its meaning is this: one should not hurry; instead, one should gradually and progressively go from one chakra to another; and like this, one has to take prana to the upper place and hold it there. This is because prana is the director of mind. If in the beginning prana is drawn up with great force to the upper place, one ends up with that kind of state. Making the prana restless instead of calm, the mind does not attain the yogic state. Instead, there is the possibility of “roga” [illness]. This is because, in the non-Kriya, or ordinary, state, all of the pathways of the nadis are blocked by gross vital-airs and phlegmatic conditions. Therefore, if at first the prana-vayu [prana-vital-air] is forcefully taken upward, that vayu [vital-air] strikes with full force at those particular pathways that are [still] blocked. But because those pathways that are struck are not clear, the aggregate of the nadis and chakras [alternate translation: the circuitous paths of the nadis] become agitated and upset. The reverse of what is desired rises forth. That is why the advice is given that one should go upward slowly and steadily. In the beginning, while still being under the power of the ordinary state of things, one should: slowly and gradually and with a special technique, perform regulated inhalation and exhalation as directed – via which the vital-air has to be taken upward progressively through the chakras such Muladhar etc.; thereby, the vital-air has to be stuffed (concentrated) within. Practicing in this way, a power/energy begins to expand inside. Due to that, the paths of the nadis are all cleared up, and that concentrated vital-air enters those particular pathways and fills up the body. The tumult of the vital-air comes to an end. Prana goes on to flow in a very subtle form, steadily, within the brahmanadi. The mind attains “uparati” [withdrawal from the worldly experience]. At this time, the mind has to be made “atmasamstha” [settled with the Self] – meaning: it, in all ways, has to be made still in Kutastha Taraka-Brahman. The flow of attention has to enter into It. One should not think about anything at all. In this state, some “smriti-samskaras” [remembered tendencies; or: memories and tendencies], in very subtle forms, try to attack the mind without its knowing, and try to break it off (make it slip) from its attention [in Kutastha]. They are successful at it as well. The way to find a way out of that – that is what Sri Bhagavan [Sri Krishna] is teaching in the very next sloka.