#### Prose 

रुद्राणां शङ्करश्चास्मि वित्तेशो यक्षरक्षसाम् |
वसूनां पावकश्चास्मि मेरु: शिखरिणामहम् || 23||
rudrāṇāṁ śhaṅkaraśh chāsmi vitteśho yakṣha-rakṣhasām
vasūnāṁ pāvakaśh chāsmi meruḥ śhikhariṇām aham

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among the “Rudras,” I am “Shankar”; among the “yakshas” and “rakshas,” I am “Kubera”; among the “vasus,” I am “Agni”; and among the mountains I am “Sumeru.”

 #### Commentary 

RudrANAṃ shankarashchAsmi – among the “Rudras” I am Shankar. There are 11 rudras. They are: “Aja,” “Ekapada,” “Ahirbradhna,” “Pinaki,” “Rita,” “Pitrirupa,” “Tryambaka,” “Vrishakapi,” “Shambhu,” “Havan” and “Ishvara.”
 
When the sadhak comes to know the [alphabet] letters in the six lotuses – at that time the sadhak sees “da,” “ya,” “pa” and “u” – these four yonis – meaning: places of abidance. The place of “da” is in the middle area between the Muladhar and Svadhisthan – at the abode of desire. The place of “ya” is in the Anahata-chakra. The place of “pa” is above the Vishuddha and below the Ajna – at the “mastak granthi.” [See Introduction, Section 5.] And the place of “u” is at the Sahasrar.
 
“Rudra” = “ra” + “u” + “da” + “ra”. “Ra” = the fire-seed; “u” = the place of settledness at Sahasrar; “da” = the yoni at the abode of desire [see above paragraph]. Therefore, the One in Whom (the Holding Place in Which) there is the fire of desire as well as the fire of mercy – in their fully manifested forms – that is the One Who is “Rudra.” Among the Rudras, I am “Shankar.” “Shang” [“ng” is the root form] – meaning: the One Who bestows Beneficence – meaning: the One Who is Only Blessing Itself. “I” AM That.
 
Vittesho yaksharakshasAm – “vitta” means the Directing Shakti [Divine Power]. This Power is divided into four parts. The first part is in the earth-element; the second part is in water; the third part is in fire; and the fourth part is merged into the sages and saints. This is the One Who is named: “Padmaa,” “Lakshmi,” “Bhooti,” “Shree,” “Shraddhaa,” “Medhaa,” “Sannati,” “Vijitaa,” “Sthiti,” “Dhriti,” “Siddhi,” “Svadhaa,” “Niyati” and “Smriti.” Whatever good or bad thing you see in this world – that thing will make you entranced. That Entrancing Power – it is She Who is the Vishnu-Maya. Because She is within everything and everyone, and She is known only through the observation of everything and everyone other than Her, no one can actually see or know Her movements. That is why She is called the Ruling Goddess of “Alakapur” [the abode[s] of certain spirits] – meaning: all of the abodes that exist from the Supreme Particle to Maya – this sattva-guna-endowed Great Shakti is the Decorator of all of those abodes. (“Al” = to clothe; decorate.) “DikpAl” – “dig” [“g” is the root form] – meaning: those who can be brought to settlement – the Directress of this activity. “Kubera” [the lord of wealth] protects this Goddess. She is Kubera’s possession. That is why “Kubera” is named “Vittesha” [having the Directing Power]. Even this bit of the game of Maya is happening in “I”. Thus, “I” am “Vittesha” [“Kubera”].
 
VasunAṃ pAvakashchAsmi [among the “vasus” I am fire] – “vasu” means “that which reveals/illuminates – meaning: the one whose energy/light energizes/illuminates another. The “vasus” are eight. They are: “Bhava,” “Dhruva,” “Soma,” “Vishnu,” “Anal,” “Anil,” “Pratyush” and “Prabhav.” “Pavak” means “Anal” [fire] or “Agni” [fire] – the one who purifies. Coming to “I”, everyone is purified; thus, “I” am “Pavak” [Purifier].
 
MerushikhariNAham [I am “Meru” among the peaks] – “Shikhari” means “mountains” – meaning: high places. Among them, “Meru” is the highest. Now, dear sadhak, take a look within. Above the Vivasvan part of Maya is “I”.