#### Prose 

मत्त: परतरं नान्यत्किञ्चिदस्ति धनञ्जय |
मयि सर्वमिदं प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव || 7||
mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiñchid asti dhanañjaya
mayi sarvam idaṁ protaṁ sūtre maṇi-gaṇā iva

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Dhananjaya [Arjuna]! There is nothing higher than Me. Like a garland of pearls strung together with a thread, the entire creation is verily strung on Me.

 #### Commentary 

“Parameshvara” [the Supreme Lord] is “ekamevAdviteeyam” - meaning: He is One and only One. He is not two. His Power is called Maya. When His Maya is merged in a dormant way in Him – meaning: when there is no manifestation of Maya – at that time He is “Brahman” [the Absolute]. And when Maya is expressing Herself, He is then “Parameshvara” [the Supreme Lord]. This Maya of His is endowed with three gunas [qualities]. When She is in expression, She takes on two forms: one Form is “Chaitanya-ness” [Consciousness], and the other form is “jada-ness” [form-bound-ness]. Then, due to the variations of the three gunas, and the colliding together of the form-bound and Consciousness versions of the prakritis, the three activities of arising, staying and demise continue on and on. It is from these three activities that the creation, preservation and destruction of the world take place. Along with the world, the creation, preservation and destruction of living beings also happen. Now, even though the Supreme Lord is One, in the created world He is seen as dual. That is actually not true; that is the delusion of Maya. It is like water, which, due to the connection with its source – fire-energy, takes on the three forms of ice, liquid and vapor due to the amount of contact with fire-energy. In actuality, it is not three; they are only different states. In the same way, Maya, due to the connection with Her Source – the Supreme Lord, takes on the forms of the many different things. And again, just as water, because of coming from fire-energy, is nothing but fire-energy itself and just a change of the form of fire-energy, in the same way, Maya is also nothing but Brahman. Thus, like the one liquid-element becoming the three forms of ice, liquid and vapor, the One Brahman is manifesting as the different forms of this creation. This is shown by the words “sutre maNigaNaiva” [strung together like pearls on a string]. Although a difference between the thread and the pearls are shown in this simile, actually the Supreme Lord is not dual. It is because the world is seen through the eyes as “many” due to Maya that the words “pearls” and “thread” - two separate things – have been used. This is only for the purposes of illustration and nothing more. But this simile points to something else as well. The Supreme Self of the Supreme Lord that is sustaining this world in the Form of “I” - that is what is being expressed by this simile. Just as: one garland needs a bunch of string; the thread is inserted through the globules, one by one; after it is completed, then, that string that is the holder of those pearls, that which allows the pearls to be bound together to be a garland at all – that very thread can no longer be seen. Yet that very thread is the only foundation or “cause” of the garland [without the thread there is no garland]. There is no other “cause” that makes the garland. The creation is just like that. The innumerable living beings – like many pearls – the beings that exist due to the combination of the form-bound and Consciousness-oriented prakritis – within these innumerable living beings, there is One “I” that is present. Everyone recognizes the existence of this “I”, but no one can see It. Like the thread of the pearl-filled garland, the “I” is the only Holder of the creation filled with living beings. The sadhak is now seeing this directly. He/she is seeing that there is nothing higher than “I”. The phenomenal creation arises from that “I” Itself and gets destroyed in It as well. The “I” is, verily, the Supreme Cause. To sum it up: the “I” is indeed the Self. In the Sky of Brahman in the sushumna, from the Sahasrar to the Muladhar, It is expressing Itself. Thus, within all substances, It is present as “Brahmasutra” [the Thread of Brahman]. It is in/on this Brahmasutra that all manifestation have their birth and existence.