#### Prose 

त्वमक्षरं परमं वेदितव्यं
त्वमस्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम् |
त्वमव्यय: शाश्वतधर्मगोप्ता
सनातनस्त्वं पुरुषो मतो मे || 18||
tvam akṣharaṁ paramaṁ veditavyaṁ
tvam asya viśhvasya paraṁ nidhānam
tvam avyayaḥ śhāśhvata-dharma-goptā
sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣho mato me

 #### Bengali Translation 

You are the Supreme Indestructible One. (You are the One Who is) that which is to be known. You are the Supreme Resting Place of this universe. You are Inexhaustible, and the director of the Eternal Dharma. You are the Universal Being. (This is verily) my perception (firm belief).

 #### Commentary 

“Tvamaksharam” = You are “akshara” [indestructible] – that which cannot be destroyed/that which cannot perish (see Chapter 8, sloka 3); “paramam” [supreme] = You are Brahman; “veditavyam” = You are the Thing that is to be known; You are “avyaya” [inexhaustible] = Limitless; “shAshvata” [eternal] = You are forever existing; “dharmagoptA” [secret protector of dharma] = You are actually the universe itself, but it looks as if You are the Support of the universe. This veil – this is what has made You the Lord of Your Secret; “sanAtana” [universal] = You are the perfect, beginning-less Eternity; “puruSha” [being; person] = You are the Inner Spirit/Being within that which is meant as “sarva” [all that exists in creation; the experiences of the 24 tattvas [elements]]. — Begin Translator’s Note — The Bengali text regarding the word “puruSha” – “sorbo [sarva] shobder [shabder] orther ontoraattaa tumi” can also be translated thus: “You are the Inner Spirit/Being within the meanings of every word.” However, the word “sarva” [every; all] has been used very specifically in the Pranab Gita to be a word that means “all that exists in creation” or “the experiences of the 24 tattvas [elements].” The translation that is presented in the main body of the text takes that previous usage of the word “sarva” into consideration. This version of the translation in the main text aligns more appropriately with the sloka and its commentary than the alternative version provided at the beginning of this footnote. — End Translator’s Note — This, verily, I have understood. 