#### Prose 

इन्द्रियाणि पराण्याहुरिन्द्रियेभ्य: परं मन: |
मनसस्तु परा बुद्धिर्यो बुद्धे: परतस्तु स: || 42||
indriyāṇi parāṇyāhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ
manasas tu parā buddhir yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The aggregate of the sense-organs are said to be high. Higher than all of the sense-organs is mind. Higher than the mind is the intellect. But the One Who is higher than the intellect – that is the One Who is “dehee” [the embodied one].

 #### Commentary 

The sense-organs are ten in number – five are dedicated to perception and five are dedicated to action. It is through these ten sense-organs that the external experience is had. Simply due to their nature, physical things are of the external experience, and are born of the five subtle elements' five mechanisms. These physical things of the external experience are experienced in the forms of sound, touch, sight, taste and smell. The sources/mechanisms of the worldly experience are the sense-organs. That is why, amongst the things associated with the enjoyment of the external experience, the aggregate of the sense-organs are highest. But the aggregate of the sense-organs are things that come from the activities of the gunas, such as sound etc.; in other words, they are tied to, or operated by, Shakti. These things that emerge the activities of the gunas are the “antarvishaya” [see note 37 with sloka 41 of this Chapter 3]  or “tanmatra[s]” [the faculties of experience behind the sense-organs], which can be experienced inside in the subtle body through the practice of yoga by stopping all of the sense-organs, which are causalities themselves, and for which the sense-organs are mechanisms, and whose actions/manifestations are the external experiences. Thus, this “antarvishaya” [inner matters] are higher than the sense-organs. This “antarvishaya” [internal source of the external experience] has been referred to as “artha” in the Upanishads, — Begin Footnote. — * “indriyebhyah parAh hyarthA arthebhyashcha paraṃ manah manasastu parA buddhih buddherAtma mahAn parah mahatah param vyaktamavyaktAt puruSho parah puruShAnna paraṃ kinchit sA kAShThA sA parA gati” - kathopaniShat 1:3:10-11 [Higher than the senses are “artha” [the faculties of experience behind the senses [tanmatra or antarvishaya]]; higher than the “artha” is the mind; the intellect is higher than the mind, beyond which is the great self. Beyond the Mahat [great cause] is the Inexpressible; beyond the Inexpressible is the Supreme Person. There is nothing whatsoever beyond the Supreme Person. That is the culmination. That is the Supreme Destination.] - Katha Upanishad 1:3:10-11 — End Footnote. —  and has been said to be higher than the sense-organs. But there is no mention of this in the Gita because: although the causes of activities/manifestations and their mechanisms can be thought of as different in analysis, in actual works [alternate translation: in practical terms [meaning: in activity]] they are the same. Higher than this “antarvishaya” is mind. This is because mind emerges from the sattvic part of the aggregate of the five primal elements. And the ten sense-organs emerge from the separate sattvic part and the separate rajasic part of the five primal elements, and are operated by the volition and non-volition of the mind. Higher than the mind is the intellect. This is because the mind is blind. The intellect resembles “pragya” [higher awareness]. The non-investigative activities of relinquishing-grasping [and such] are of the mind; and the activities of finding the certainty of truth and untruth through investigation is of the intellect. The one who is beyond this intellect is the self. As the witness of all, this self resides within all. It is the embodied being. Desire can cover it with delusion, but cannot touch it. (This embodied being is indeed the jiva or the self-element. Higher than the self-element is the Mahat-tattva [great substance; great cause]; higher than the Mahat is Avyakta [the Inexpressible], and higher than the Avyakta is Purush [Supreme Person]. There is nothing beyond Purush. That is the Supreme Destination.)