#### Prose 

ममैवांशो जीवलोके जीवभूत: सनातन: |
मन:षष्ठानीन्द्रियाणि प्रकृतिस्थानि कर्षति || 7||
mamaivānśho jīva-loke jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ
manaḥ-ṣhaṣhṭhānīndriyāṇi prakṛiti-sthāni karṣhati

 #### Bengali Translation 

Verily, My Fragments become all of the living beings in the world of living beings and attract the Prakriti-residing mind and the five senses such as sound etc.

 #### Commentary 

The coming and going of the jiva [living being] is endlessly happening. Then why would the jiva not return after going to the Supreme Abode? In order to explain this statement, the Lord is saying that the jiva is actually a part of Me. It takes on the state of separateness due to My Maya-delusion. For as long as there is the delusion of Maya, for that long does the coming and going go on. If the root of the Maya-delusion is cut apart by the weapon of non-attachment, the state of separateness ends. My fragment becomes one with Me, and no “going about” remains.
 
This state can be explained by certain examples.
 
Just as the one effulgence of the sun becomes innumerable suns when it reflects on the waves of water – in the same way, the One Supreme Self, because of reflecting on the Prakritic waves, has become the creation of these innumerable living beings.  Just as that sun in the water dances due to being under the power of the water – similarly, the jiva, being under the power of Prakriti, becomes enjoined to the six – the mind and the [five] senses together – and goes on doing activity. And then when the waves of the water cease, the many reflections on the bubbles disappear; and when the water dries up, the reflection of the sun disappears into the sun, and does not come back again. In the same way, when the Prakritic waves end, the jiva’s state of multiplicity disappears, and a state of One comes forth. And with the dissolution of Prakriti, that reflection that is the form of the jiva, mixes back in with that Supreme Self, and never returns again.
 
That which is the Division-free Great – how can It have a “part”? You are “Only-Rama.” But when you dress up as Hanuman in the theater of Rama, then, just like your friends who see you do not take in your “Only-Rama-ness” into their antahkarana [mind as a whole] but enjoy you as Hanuman and Hanuman’s seeing, hearing, speaking [etc.], and you [too] enjoy that – this is like that. Just as when walls are broken down and the feeling of divided space in a room goes away and one great space is known – it is like that. I Am Indivisible; I Am like that forever. The gunas [primal qualities] of Prakriti are three. By mixing with the organs of perception and mind, they are showing many forms like that of the rainbow in “I”. Thus, the carnival of jivas is the Indivisible “I” dressed up as differences. A little while ago you were “I”, and now again that “you” became “I”, yet there is not even a scintilla of change. Now understand this, what else?