#### Prose 

सततं कीर्तयन्तो मां यतन्तश्च दृढव्रता: |
नमस्यन्तश्च मां भक्त्या नित्ययुक्ता उपासते || 14||
satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaśh cha dṛiḍha-vratāḥ
namasyantaśh cha māṁ bhaktyā nitya-yuktā upāsate

 #### Bengali Translation 

(Those great souls) continuously praise Me, and being firm in vows and taking great care, they bow to Me in devotion, and as they become eternally united [with the Self], they worship [the Self].

 #### Commentary 

When the eyes of Prakriti and Purush meet in a continuous and unbroken way (the one Who is Prakriti, that is the one who is the sadhak), at that time, the sadhak, through the power of the vision of the third eye, goes inside [the third eye], blends together the particles and sub-particles outside and inside, becomes half “I”, and, making the non-attributed-ness of the “I” and the sadhak’s attributed-ness as one, sees the permutations taking place in the attributed-ness and the Purity in non-attributed-ness. This seeing – this is that which is called “the praising of the ‘I’.” This means: it is like when I sit all alone and think about all the qualities of a loved thing and become happy doing so, yet no one outside can know that joy; the joy of the heart stays in the heart and makes the heart intoxicated – this praising is also like that. So that the Purity of the non-attributed does not mix with the permutations of the attributed, and so that the permutations of the attributed does not mix its impurity into the Purity of the non-attributed – the sadhak becomes firmly alert about this matter. This is that which is called “being firm in vow and taking great care.” Impurity is in Prakriti. Purity is in “I”. Attending to Purity, and again coming to impurity and again looking to Purity, again coming back to impurity – this going up and down that has now come into play – this is that which is called “namaskar” [bowing in reverence]. This is the fruit of unwavering faith in guru’s words. Unwavering faith in guru’s words is called “bhakti” [devotion]. As that coming and going continues, the impermanence of Prakriti is progressively reduced due to the contact with “I”. I AM Eternal. Gradually, through being united again and again with “I”, Prakriti merges into the meditation of “I” and becomes Eternal. It is like the red color of the hibiscus flower entering a crystal close to it. The hibiscus is separate; the crystal is also separate. The crystal is very clear. Like the way it takes the color of the hibiscus and becomes red, Prakriti’s worship of “I” is like that.