#### Prose 

न काङ्क्षे विजयं कृष्ण न च राज्यं सुखानि च |
किं नो राज्येन गोविन्द किं भोगैर्जीवितेन वा || 32||
na kāṅkṣhe vijayaṁ kṛiṣhṇa na cha rājyaṁ sukhāni cha
kiṁ no rājyena govinda kiṁ bhogair jīvitena vā

येषामर्थे काङ्क्षितं नो राज्यं भोगा: सुखानि च |
त इमेऽवस्थिता युद्धे प्राणांस्त्यक्त्वा धनानि च || 33||
yeṣhām arthe kāṅkṣhitaṁ no rājyaṁ bhogāḥ sukhāni cha
ta ime ’vasthitā yuddhe prāṇāṁs tyaktvā dhanāni cha

आचार्या: पितर: पुत्रास्तथैव च पितामहा: |
मातुला: श्वशुरा: पौत्रा: श्याला: सम्बन्धिनस्तथा || 34||
āchāryāḥ pitaraḥ putrās tathaiva cha pitāmahāḥ
mātulāḥ śhvaśhurāḥ pautrāḥ śhyālāḥ sambandhinas tathā

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Govinda [Sri Krishna]! What need do we have for the kingdom? And what good are enjoyments and pleasures? What is the need even for life itself? Those for whom we pray for kingdom, enjoyments and happiness – those very people are these teachers, sons, and what is more – even grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandchildren, brothers-in-law and [other] family members [or: relatives]. O Madhusudan [Sri Krishna]! Even if these [persons] kill us, I do not wish to kill these [persons].

 #### Commentary 

“Govinda”: the sound “go” represents the Earth. The One Who rules this Earth – He is the One Who is Govinda. Now the sadhak is seeing: whatever the activities of the inner operations that are going on in this field of the body – all of that is being manifested/revealed via Kutastha Chaitanya. [The sadhak] is perceiving/understanding quite well that he/she has no authority [or: doership] over anything at all. All that is, is happening via the Consciousness-Power. Yet, having become caught up in the swirl of Maya, the delusion of “mine and others'” [or: “me and others]” is not going away. That is why, when Knowledge is being revealed, [the sadhak] is knowing Kutastha Chaitanya as “Govinda,” and [then] again, taking up the motherly feeling (the addiction [to samsara] coming from the idea of “me and mine”), [the sadhak] is saying, “What will we get out of having the kingdom? What need is there for enjoyments? Is life even necessary at all? The ones with whom I desire to enjoy the kingdom and enjoy happiness – I am seeing that they are the very ones who will lose their life and their possessions in this war. O Madhusudan [Sri Krishna]! That I die – that is even better. I am not willing to destroy (give up) all of this.
 
Now let us see: “kingdom,” “enjoyments,” “happiness” - what are these? The purpose/aim of sadhana is to be Liberated from the bondage of samsara which comes in the form of birth and death – meaning: leaving behind death-ness and attaining immortality. The body is made up of six “vikaras” [modifications/mutations] -  “asti, jAyate, vardhate, vipariNamate, apaksheeyate, vinashyati iti ShaTvikArAh” [existence, birth, growth, change/mutation, decay, death – these are the six “vikaras” [modifications/mutations [of the body]]. At the very beginning [of sadhana], the sadhak believes that those modifications/mutations will be ended through the practice of sadhana, and that he/she will have possession and power over the “kingdom” in the form of this body. [The sadhak] will “enjoy” this kingdom in any way he/she wishes and be “happy.” In short, [the sadhak] will become “jivanmukta” [Liberated while alive in the body], and [at the same time] he/she will stay on water, land, air [any place wished for] and will enjoy the Bliss of Brahman along with enjoying the worldly ways. But, as [the sadhak] actually “gets hands-on practice” of sadhana, he/she sees that everything is against him/her. From right at the beginning, [the sadhak] has to give up the desires of enjoyments; after that, the ego has to be destroyed forever; and worldly thinking has to be totally abandoned. And [the sadhak] sees even more: one has to bring all of the senses such as eyes, ears, nose etc. and close all of the “doors” [openings of the body]; not only that, even the mind itself has to be locked-up into the heart, and [along with that] prana has to be established in the head. When [the sadhak] endeavors to do all of these things, he/she perceives [the situation] as a life-ending physical torment. At that time one thinks, “There is no need any more for the enjoyment of happiness that comes from being Liberated while alive. I am fine just the way I am. Even if I die, that is also fine; still there is no good in destroying the desires for enjoyments. [I know that] desires are never fulfilled in samsara; one has to always experience lack. Even that is fine; I still cannot bear this suffering. By stopping the eyes and ears and such, I will have to become blind and deaf. There is no need to carry around this lump of flesh in that condition and be called a 'jivanmukta.' And more, will the deep need really be fulfilled by giving up the desires for enjoyments and staying alive in this kind of way? Even death is better.”
Because of ignorance, the [sadhak] becomes unsettled by the challenges of sadhana, and this type of grief arises in the mind in the beginning. If one makes even a little effort in the path of sadhana, all of these things are directly known.
 
“Madhusoodana”: Having become unsettled with physical and mental torment, [the sadhak] believes him/herself to be in grave danger. And remembering the dictum “vipatte madhusoodanah” [in danger, [call] Madhusudan], [the sadhak] goes on uttering “Madhusudan” towards Kutastha. The reason: the Lord is called “Madhusudan” - as He destroys evil. As:
 
“madhukleebaṃcha mAdhveeke kṛtakarmA shubhAshubhe
bhaktAnaṃ karmanAṃchaiva soodanaṃ madhusoodanah;
pariNAmAshubhaṃ karma bhrantAnAṃ madhuraṃ madhu
karoti soodanaṃ yohi sa eva madhusoodanah.”
 
“AchAryah pitarah putrAh” [teachers, fathers, sons] etc.: The kinds of powers that are attained by the sadhak through the practice of Kriya of the vital-air in the nadis and chakras, and the particular types of vrittis that arise in those paritcular powers – those are the things that have been referred to as these “teachers, fathers, sons” etc. One who does Kriya and becomes established in Kriya comes to know about all of these things by oneself. Speaking about that knowledge gained by personal and direct experience would be nothing but a ridiculous endeavor.