#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
मया प्रसन्नेन तवार्जुनेदं
रूपं परं दर्शितमात्मयोगात् |
तेजोमयं विश्वमनन्तमाद्यं
यन्मे त्वदन्येन न दृष्टपूर्वम् || 47||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
mayā prasannena tavārjunedaṁ
rūpaṁ paraṁ darśhitam ātma-yogāt
tejo-mayaṁ viśhvam anantam ādyaṁ
yan me tvad anyena na dṛiṣhṭa-pūrvam

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “O Arjuna. Being pleased, I revealed to you this Splendrous, Universal, Infinite, Primal and Supreme Form through My “Atma-yoga” [see commentary below], which no one other than you has previously seen.”

 #### Commentary 

Again, the sadhak is resolving the previously seen “lilas” [sportings] through his/her own experience. O Arjuna! The manifestation of this incredible, living vision that you have just seen, from the perspective of a subject of the world of beings/planes – this happened because of My “prasannata” [being pleased] – (“pra” + “sad” = going + “ta”) – meaning: this is the definition of feeling something as one’s own. That experience of that and the repose that follows – that is called “prasannata” [being appeased]; this is because: for as long as there was any vritti [functionality] within the antahkarana [the whole mind] with the adjunct “mine,” for that long you could not make the space to see the play of that Incredible, Lifegiving Power. When you left your “I” and “mine” and fell into the True “I” – only then did that [cosmic] event of yours – previously unseen – take place. This is verily that which is called “Atma-yoga,” by which you saw that Primordial, Infinite, Supreme Form – meaning: the Form that is beyond all forms. There is not a single fragment of a particle of earth in any of That. It is simply the ultimate sport of the moving creation, light-filled and built on splendrous energy. When one ascends through the middle of the brahmanadi to the Sahasrar and pierces the light and merges the mind [in the Divinity], this state is experienced/known. The way that you saw this – it can only be seen by being in this way. If it is not so, no one else can have it.