#### Prose 

ये चैव सात्त्विका भावा राजसास्तामसाश्च ये |
मत्त एवेति तान्विद्धि न त्वहं तेषु ते मयि || 12||
ye chaiva sāttvikā bhāvā rājasās tāmasāśh cha ye
matta eveti tān viddhi na tvahaṁ teṣhu te mayi

 #### Bengali Translation 

Sattvic, rajasic and tamasic – these particular conditions – know that these arise from Me. But I am not in any of them. All of them are in Me. 

 #### Commentary 

(15) “I am the cause of the states of the three gunas.” Due to being under the power of one's own karma, many kinds of states of being arise in the mind of the jiva [individual]. Some of those experiential states are sattvic, some are rajasic, and some are tamasic. Serenity, self-control etc. are sattvic states of being. Pleasure, pride etc. are rajasic states of being. And grief, delusion etc. are tamasic states of being. All of these states actually arise from the State of the Self – meaning: because Prakriti becomes active due to the Self, all of the permutations of Prakriti that there are – the foundation or cause of all of them is the Self. Thus, the Lord, in the form of Cause, is the foundation of all states of being. (16) “I am not in any of them; all of them are in Me”: Although the Supreme Self is Cause, It is not in contact [with the experiences]. The Prakritic mutations cannot touch It. Thus, because the Prakritic states have their foundation as the Self, they are under the Power of the Self. But the Self does not take the Prakritic states as Its foundation. Thus, It is not under the control of anything. It is Eternal, Immaculate, Aware, Free. It is the Supreme Cause. There is nothing that causes It. Thus, It is the Foundation of all.