#### Prose 

स्वधर्ममपि चावेक्ष्य न विकम्पितुमर्हसि |
धर्म्याद्धि युद्धाच्छ्रेयोऽन्यत्क्षत्रियस्य न विद्यते || 31||
swa-dharmam api chāvekṣhya na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyāddhi yuddhāch chhreyo ’nyat kṣhatriyasya na vidyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

And more, even after perceiving “svadharma” [one's true dharma], it is not appropriate for you to be shaken. This is because there is no greater thing for Kshatriyas [warrior or royal caste] to do than to fight for righteousness.

 #### Commentary 

“Svadharma” [one's true dharma] = the dharma of the Self. The abode/field of the Self is above — Begin Footnote. — “Yo buddhe paratastu sah” [that which is beyond the intellect] – Chapter 3, sloka 42 [of the Gita]. “Manasastu parA buddhirbuddherAtmA” [beyond the mind is the intellect; above that is the Self] – shrutih [Katha Upanishad or Kathopanishad]. — End Footnote. — the abode/field of the intellect. When one comes to this field [of the Self] (in the path of “anuloma” [see sloka 16 of this Chapter 2]), because of the presence of the Pure Ahamkar – filled with a tenderly luminous Light like clusters of lightning, [a knowing, like:] “I am all,” “I am 'I'” - this kind of settled and steady, unified experience and state of “I-ness” comes. This is the true “svadharma” - the state filled with the Absolutely Pure Substance. Dear sadhak! You, upon piercing the Light within the Sound in the Sahasrar via the Kriyayoga received from guru's teachings, dissolving the mind, and becoming one with Vishnu-ness – you have directly experienced and realized that “svadharma.” After knowing that, being shaken like this is no longer appropriate. You are a Kshatriya, engaged in the establishment of the Kingdom of the Self and of that dharma of the Self. Your recourse is verily in rajoguna. Therefore, the splendrous actions of rajoguna, the engagement of warfare with energy/fire – that is your “svadharma.” Now, that dharma of the Self, which is: taking the support of serenity, self-control etc., together with the splendrous energy-fire etc. of your “svadharma,” and for the purpose of destroying the “me” (“the body is me” - destroying this vain and egoistic perception), conducting warfare (pranayam) – there is no second thing that is greater for you to do than this.