#### Prose 

कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे हेतु: प्रकृतिरुच्यते |
पुरुष: सुखदु:खानां भोक्तृत्वे हेतुरुच्यते || 21||
kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛitve hetuḥ prakṛitir uchyate
puruṣhaḥ sukha-duḥkhānāṁ bhoktṛitve hetur uchyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

“Karya” [action], “kaaran” [cause] and “kartritva” [doership] are caused by and associated with Prakriti; it is said. And the experiencing of the aggregate of pleasure, pain and such are associated with Purush; it is said.

 #### Commentary 

That Fundamental Prakriti that has been spoken about – that has mutated and become seven – meaning: five tanmatras [essence of the senses] (sound, touch, sight, taste, smell), intellect and ego. This seven are called “prakriti-vikriti” [mutations of Prakriti]. These make up “kaaran” [cause]. And then again, transforming into sixteen, it takes the name of “vikar” [permutations; further changes] – such as: five primal elements (earth, water, fire, air, space); five organs of perception (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin); five organs of action (speech, hands/arms, feet/legs, anus, sex organ) – these fifteen plus mind. The physical body that has come about from the coming together of all of these, that is called “karya” [work; actions]. That is why Prakriti is said to be the cause of actions and causalities. And that Purush? He has no cause. Although He is Boundless, He has gone on to become small due to circumstances, abides in the abyss of the limitedness of Prakriti, and is experiencing pleasure and pain [and such], all born of the qualities of Prakriti. This experiencing is like this: in a pentagonal room there are five corners of space; in a room with seven corners, there are seven corners [of space]; in a circular room the space is circular; like this, [the space] is fragrant in fragrance, full of stench in stench, smokey in smoke – meaning: although space has no such experience within itself, those who are residing in that space go on experiencing those particular pleasures and pains, and the stains of those pleasures and pains go on being smeared on that space which is [actually] unconnected [to the stains and to the residents of that space]. Like this: that space within that room is malodorous, fragrant, smokey, full of darkness etc. Yet, the poor space itself has no such imperfections. Dear sadhak! Here you have your Purush’s experiencing/partaking. Lord! Lord!

It is as if the incredibly beautiful, grand-sport-playing Prakriti’s ascribed attributes make up the roots of the vines of the visible world.