#### Prose 

शौर्यं तेजो धृतिर्दाक्ष्यं युद्धे चाप्यपलायनम् |
दानमीश्वरभावश्च क्षात्रं कर्म स्वभावजम् || 43||
śhauryaṁ tejo dhṛitir dākṣhyaṁ yuddhe chāpy apalāyanam
dānam īśhvara-bhāvaśh cha kṣhātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam

 #### Bengali Translation 

Heroism, fiery power, steadfastness, skillfulness, not fleeing in battle, generosity and being connected with godly thoughts [alternate translation: having lordly behavior] – these are the natural duties of the kshatriya.  

 #### Commentary 

The power that does not allow one to become tired even after battling through the eight periods [the whole day and night] (Kriya) – the name of that great power is “shaurya” [heroic power]. “Teja” [fiery power] – is the power to burn the enemy (to bring Prakriti with her soldiers under the sadhak’s power). The power that does not allow the coming about of even a bit of hopelessness – that is “dhriti” [steadfastness], or the power to hold on (getting up above Ajna-chakra and keeping the attention firmly and unbrokenly on Supreme Shiva). Seeing directly the fruits coming forth from actions born of causes, and keeping them ready in the heart is “dakshata” [having skill]. No matter what situation takes place on the battlefield, to not turn one’s back and remain facing it is “apalayan” [non-fleeing] (keeping one’s sight on Kutastha at the time of coming down to the Muladhar from the Ajna-chakra, and again rising while still looking in that same direction – like going up and down a ladder). “Daan” = the acceptance of relinquishing. And belief in God – meaning: the attitude of accepting lordship and making [another] accept lordship. These are the natural duties of kshatriyas. By cultivating these, [the kshatriya] goes in the Upward Way.  