#### Prose 

यज्ञार्थात्कर्मणोऽन्यत्र लोकोऽयं कर्मबन्धन: |
तदर्थं कर्म कौन्तेय मुक्तसङ्ग: समाचर || 9||
yajñārthāt karmaṇo ’nyatra loko ’yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ
tad-arthaṁ karma kaunteya mukta-saṅgaḥ samāchara

 #### Bengali Translation 

Doing action other than those that are for “yagya” [oblation; offering into fire], one has to become bound to the bindings of karma on this plane [of existence]. Therefore, Kaunteya [Arjuna]! Be unattached, and perform action as “yagya.”  -9-

 #### Commentary 

“Yagya” - meaning: “homa” [oblation; offering into fire] – meaning: throwing ghee [clarified butter] into ceremonial fire while chanting mantras with “uddesha” [intent] towards the “devas” [gods]. Vishnu is the One Who is the true “Deva” [God]. The Lord Himself has said, “ahamAdihirdevAnaṃ” [I am even prior to the gods]. It is from Him that “pravṛttih prasṛtA purANee” [all has come forth from the beginning]. It is He Who is the Kutastha Purush. “Ut” - “urdhadesha” [the upper area] – meaning: being focused on Kutastha is “uddesha” [intent]. Keeping attention on Kutastha, giving the oblation of prana in every chakra according to the instructed injunctions of guru (this is called “prana-yagya”; it is also called “antarayaga”), when the mind becomes enraptured by the resonance of the buzzing of bees, then the elixir (“amrita” [nectar]) drips from the Sahasrar. That elixir has to be thrown to the “vaishvanara” [fire in the navel area] via the upwardly turned tongue, according to the method instructed by guru; that is, indeed, “yagya!” This does not happen without “deva-uddeshya” [intent on the Divine]. And it is with this that the Lord of yagyas – Vishnu – becomes pleased. - Start Footnote - One who can give oblation to the “jatharagni” [digestive fire] which is known by the name “Sudha Vaishvanara” [elixir of the universal being; elixir and fire in the navel region], that oblation pervades throughout all of the nadis [subtle energy pathways], nourishing and awakening all of the powers (the beings that reside on each of the petals of the lotuses). Because of this the body becomes radiant; light shines forth [from the body]. This body is verily the temple of Vishnu, where Brahman-God Hari presides. - End Footnote. -   The type of “karma” [yogic act] – the type of pranic movement (to learn which is the very reason for following guru) that pleases the Lord of yagyas – that is what is known as “tadarthaṃ karma” [the meaningful act]. Doing any other act besides that “tadartha” [meaningful] act (meaning: not offering prana in every lotus while keeping the mind steadily on Kutastha – meaning: when the mind does not become fully merged in prana) one absolutely will fall into the “bandhan” [bindings] of the Prakritic karma of the world.- Start Footnote. - “Bandhan” [bindings]: the karma whose fruits have to be experienced – that is “bandhan.” That “bandhan” is indeed the covering of Prakriti. That covering is differentiated into many types such as physical, subtle [and such]. The physical body is a “bandhan.” One cannot leave the recourse of the physical condition and abide in the sky. Due to being under the power of gravity, one has to fall to the ground. The subtle body is another “bandhan.” Now this one has different kinds of heavier and lighter types [of bindings] according to the different karma-samskaras [impressed tendencies which become active]. With this [subtle] body, one can leave the earthly plane and go into the path of air, but one cannot cross past the sphere of air. One has to go around in the levels or planes [of existence] according to the samskaras [impressed tendencies]. One cannot go the level of the pure sphere of space which is above that [sphere of air]. After ordinary death occurs, the non-liberated spirits stay in this sphere of air in many ways/forms. Later, due to the ascribed time of abiding there coming to an end, and because of the fruits of previous actions, they return to samsara. For as long as the karmas are not eliminated, for that long does one have to suffer this “bandhan”-affliction of coming and going. Through sadhana, the beneficent samskaras grow and that brings about the end of karmas, and one becomes free of “bandhan” [bindings] and becomes Liberated. “Yadi dehaṃ pṛthakkṛtya chiti vishrAmya tiShThasi; adhunaiva sukheeshAntah bandhamukto bhaviShyasi” [if you separate your consciousness from the body and rest in Awareness, you will even now/at once be happy and peaceful, free from bondage] – Ashtavakra Saṃhita, First Section. - End Footnote. - It is for this reason that one has to let go of attachment (because attachment is the very reason for being bound to karma) and perform the “tadartha” [meaningful] act. This is the teaching that is given.