#### Prose 

आब्रह्मभुवनाल्लोका: पुनरावर्तिनोऽर्जुन |
मामुपेत्य तु कौन्तेय पुनर्जन्म न विद्यते || 16||
ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino ’rjuna
mām upetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Arjuna! Even those who come up to the Brahmaloka [highest plane] return [to birth and death]. But Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! When one attains Me, no rebirth happens again.

 #### Commentary 

When the not-quite-fully-ripened, yet advanced, sadhak returns again to the samsaric state upon having experienced the happiness of the equipoise of samadhi, and wants to discuss the matter of the state of the settledness of samadhi – at that time, the sadhak, seeing the fruits of the paravastha of Kriya [see commentary [above] to sloka 8:14 of the Pranab Gita] and the fruits of the state of being in samsara, comes to know this [stated below]. “Bhuvan” [world/s; plane/s] – means everything that exists within the sheath of the sun. Those with body-identification are called “Brahmaa [creator].” Starting from this Brahmaa, whatever there is – stone-born, egg-born, seed-born, womb-born – all are residents of “bhuvan.” All of these are slaves to birth and death and are going round and round, again and again. This is because they have no realization of the previously mentioned “True ‘I’.” (See the commentary to the 5th sloka [of this chapter 8].) When that “I” is realized/known – O sadhak who is bound to body-identification! You will never have rebirth again. There are 14 worlds. The one that is the highest – that is “Brahma-bhuvan” or the “Satyaloka” of Brahman. This Satyaloka is in the Sahasrar; therefore, it is subject to Prakritic rulership. If the sadhak, at the time of death, comes up to even this Satyaloka but is not able to merge the chitta [personal consciousness] into Consciousness/Spirit – regardless of coming up to this highest plane, the sadhak has to again take on a body. This is because: as long as personal consciousness does not leave Prakriti and does not merge with Being, for that long will there be birth and death due to being under the power of Prakriti. Even after getting to the highest plane of Brahma-bhuvan, there is no release. But if the chitta at the time [of death] can become absorbed in Consciousness/Spirit, then, no matter from which location one leaves the body, one never has to take birth again.