#### Prose 

श्रेयान्स्वधर्मो विगुण: परधर्मात्स्वनुष्ठितात् |
स्वधर्मे निधनं श्रेय: परधर्मो भयावह: || 35||
śhreyān swa-dharmo viguṇaḥ para-dharmāt sv-anuṣhṭhitāt
swa-dharme nidhanaṁ śhreyaḥ para-dharmo bhayāvahaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

It is better to be in one's own dharma [way of being] without any qualities than to be properly established in another's dharma [way of being]. It is best to die in one's own dharma. The dharma of another is frightful.

 #### Commentary 

The thing in the body that is called “I” - that is “sva” [one's own]; and that which is called “mine”  - that is “par” [others']. “I” means the Self. Thus, it is the Self that is “sva.” “Mine” means the tri-guna filled twenty-four elements. Thus, all of those are “par.” What is the Self like? Like - “sacchidAnandasvaroopah” [Existence/Truth, Consciousness and Bliss Itself] – that which remains in the same state [or: the same] in all three divisions of time – that is why It is “Sat” [Existence/Truth]; and “Chit” - Consciousness Itself – and “Ananda” [Bliss] – Happiness Itself. How are the twenty-four [elements]? Like - “asanmayah,” “tAmasah,” “nityaṃ vikAravAn” - meaning: untrue, limited, ignorance-filled and always changing. As each one [of the elements] is, each one's dharma is of that particular state. Thus, “svadharma” [one's own dharma] means the Eternal, Aware and Blissful State. “Paradharma” [the dharma of others] means that changing and ignorant state. Because of non-activity in the unified state of the three gunas, the dharma of the Self is without any qualities. And when the three gunas are agitated [into action], because of all activities being carried out [due to that agitation], [it is referred to as] “being properly established in the others' dharma.” Unified equilibrium is freedom from samsara; agitation is bondage to samsara. This is the meaning of: “it is best to be in one's own dharma without any qualities than to be well established in another's dharma.” (If one is not able to stay in the Endless State devoid of the three gunas, it is better to just endure the struggle of the sadhana-practice to attain the State devoid of the three gunas. So it follows that it is not good to throw oneself in Prakritic dharma and think that ignorance is bliss.) If one has a body, then the casting-off of that body, or death, is inevitable. If one dies when one is in the dharma of the Self, then one attains the State of Sacchitananda [Existence/Truth, Consciousness, Bliss]. That is why it is called “best” [to die in that dharma]. And if death happens when one is in “paradharma” [dharma of everything other than the Self], then one loses one's aim, falls into the torrential current of birth and death in the darkness of ignorance in samsara, and has to go around and about [in that]. That is why it is “frightful.”