#### Prose 

कार्पण्यदोषोपहतस्वभाव:
पृच्छामि त्वां धर्मसम्मूढचेता: |
यच्छ्रेय: स्यान्निश्चितं ब्रूहि तन्मे
शिष्यस्तेऽहं शाधि मां त्वां प्रपन्नम् || 7||
kārpaṇya-doṣhopahata-svabhāvaḥ
pṛichchhāmi tvāṁ dharma-sammūḍha-chetāḥ
yach-chhreyaḥ syānniśhchitaṁ brūhi tanme
śhiṣhyaste ’haṁ śhādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

 #### Bengali Translation 

In what kind of way can I live after killing my relatives? This desperation as well as [the thought that] destroying lineage will cause sin – thinking in this erroneous way [or: thinking about sin] has caused my normal nature (“shaurya” [splendor]) to be overcome with confusion. And a doubt has come up: “Is taking up the act of begging appropriate to the dharma of kshatriyas?” So I am asking You [Sri Krishna], tell me what is best for me with certainty. I am Your disciple. I surrender to You. Please teach me.

 #### Commentary 

In this sloka, the sadhak is completely abandoning the vanity of doership and surrendering to the feet of guru. [The sadhak] is saying, “Being taken over by affectionate attachment, my power of reasoning and understanding has become covered up. Even the chitta has become deluded on the subject of dharma. So I ask You [Sri Krishna], please tell me, with certainty, what is best. I am [Your] disciple. I take refuge in you. Advise me as to what I should do.” Unless one accepts and admits disciple-ness and surrenders, the teachings on spirituality cannot be had. Just as this is true in the outer [world], it is the same in the inner [world]. This is because: it is seen that if one does not abandon ahaṃkar [ego] (the feeling of doership) and does not devotedly surrender to the feet of guru during the practice of Kriya – in no way does the inner vision open; neither is spiritual knowledge gained. So, to admit disciple-ness to the satguru is what is being taught in this sloka.