#### Prose 

कर्मण्यकर्म य: पश्येदकर्मणि च कर्म य: |
स बुद्धिमान्मनुष्येषु स युक्त: कृत्स्नकर्मकृत् || 18||
karmaṇyakarma yaḥ paśhyed akarmaṇi cha karma yaḥ
sa buddhimān manuṣhyeṣhu sa yuktaḥ kṛitsna-karma-kṛit

 #### Bengali Translation 

The one who sees akarma in karma, and karma in akarma – that one is “buddhiman” [intelligent]; that one is “yukta” [united]; and that one is “kritsnakarmakrit” [one who performs all actions].

 #### Commentary 

At the time of sadhana, two powers work on the sadhak. One is the power of vikarma, — Begin Footnote. — This is the activity of the apana vayu [outgoing prana]. — End Footnote. — and another is the power of karma [power of the spiritual act]. Karma tries to keep the sadhak's self settled, and tries to take it beyond the “gahana” - meaning: tries to take it beyond Maya. And vikarma tries to pull the sadhak towards the worldly experience and keep it there. The body itself is the totality of the actions of vikarma. This vikarma is so strong that, right at the very moment before settledness is about to happen in the Consciousness-Self through karmayoga [yogic practice], it awakens in the mind some worldly experience of sound, touch and such, and covers up Consciousness/Spirit. At that time, because doership [for the sadhak's mind] has come to an end, and because Kriya is going on without self-effort, the benumbed mind becomes settled in that worldly experience instead of becoming settled in Consciousness/Spirit. Thus, that settledness, instead of being akarma [non-karma; non-action], becomes one of the vikarma-experience. (See sloka 16 [of this Chapter 4].) And even this kind of thing can happen: when the sadhak actually does become settled in akarma and then, being free of doership, via the natural, effort-free Kriya that happens at that time (like the rock-candy dissolving in the water [but still evident in appearance]), the sadhak gradually mixes more and more [with the Self] and goes towards becoming the One Essence by melting in Paramatman Brahman – at that time, due to the pressure of strong physical vikarma, that still state breaks, like being suddenly awakened from sleep. Thus, the sadhak has to again come to the vikarma, which is adjoined with sound, touch etc. When one practices Kriya regularly, every day and in this way, one becomes steadfast; after that, the force of vikarma gradually becomes weak, and the force of karma [yogic act] becomes strong. Then the momentary settledness in akarma gradually becomes long-lasting settledness. As one goes on to enjoy the stillness in the long-lasting settledness, when mind eventually becomes “I”-filled, then, even after coming down to vikarma, — Begin Footnote. — one no longer has to be taken over by the experiences of vikarma. This is because the taste of Bliss that comes forth upon attaining Stillness in Consciousness/Spirit, as the mind stays absorbed in that, the attention remains in that direction. Thus, the prana-karma [yoga], for which one has become fit through sadhana, goes on happening by itself even at that time. Even if the sadhak of this state of being does karma [acts], he/she goes on being in akarma [non-action]. And again, even though the sadhak remains in the Bliss of the Self with the attention in akarma, the knowingness and acumen necessary to perform karma [action] is also present. Thus, both karma and akarma go on happening at the same time for that sadhak. Therefore, for that sadhak, akarma in karma, and karma in akarma are seen. It is this kind of sadhak that is “buddhiman” [intelligent], because his/her intelligence turns away from the worldly experience and remains Still and enjoined to the Self. It [the intelligence] does not become “vikshipta” (spent). That is why that sadhak is “yukta” [united]! And more, that sadhak is “kritsna karmakrita” [performer of all actions] – meaning: is devoid of the throwing-off-power-vikarma  having performed the entire karma [yogic act].  And, in the subtlest of the subtle vritti that remains just before becoming, united, merged and becoming One – in that all of the different karmas of both the pravritti and nivritti types that exist are present. Because that sadhak knows the knowledge of all of those, that sadhak is all-knowing. (This is, verily, the state of “jivanmukta” [Liberated while still living in the body]. It is after this that there is the casting-off of the body and “videha brahmatva” [being Brahman after leaving the body].)