#### Prose 

पुरुष: प्रकृतिस्थो हि भुङक्ते प्रकृतिजान्गुणान् |
कारणं गुणसङ्गोऽस्य सदसद्योनिजन्मसु || 22||
puruṣhaḥ prakṛiti-stho hi bhuṅkte prakṛiti-jān guṇān
kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu

 #### Bengali Translation 

The reason for experiencing all of the qualities born of Prakriti is because Purush is within Prakriti. All of the births that take place in its [Prakriti’s] good and bad wombs – the cause of these matters is the association with the gunas. 

 #### Commentary 

The delusional imaginations that come about within the Limitless due to the transformations (changes) brought about by the activities and causalities of the limited – [they are] like the blue that is seen in the formless sky due to the sky’s depth and the weakness of eyesight. Just as that is never true – in the same way, the lie of the existence of the non-substantial and limited Prakriti in the Still, Limitless Brahman-Substance is just a lie-filled delusion. And the delirium that is the experiencing of that delusion, that delirium is actually “Purush,” as well as “Purush being within Prakriti.” From that kind of delirium rises the delusional experiential functionalities of pleasure and pain [and such] and: “I am happy”; “I am sad”; “I am ignorant”; “I am wise” – these types of distorted concepts [arise], which are like delirium, cutting Brahman into pieces and making up a “Purush,” the experiencer. This is the taking of your attributeless-ness, mixing it with attributes, and giving out the falsehood of calling you “the experiencer of the attributes.” Just as, in the morning, many-colored forms can be seen by the light of the sun’s rays shining on the dew on barley-stalks – meaning: it is like when many kinds of colors can be seen due to the movement of the sun in the dewdrops – it is like that, brother! The qualities of the imaginary Prakritis cause the quality-free Purush to be associated with qualities/attributes. As the qualities of those Prakritis qualities/attributes are brought together within certain perimeters, so are the births of the pieces of Brahman, such as gods, humans etc., taking place in their [appropriate] types of wombs, and [the births of] animals, birds, insects, creepers etc. taking place in lower kinds of wombs. 