#### Prose 

मनुष्याणां सहस्रेषु कश्चिद्यतति सिद्धये |
यततामपि सिद्धानां कश्चिन्मां वेत्ति तत्त्वत: || 3||
manuṣhyāṇāṁ sahasreṣhu kaśhchid yatati siddhaye
yatatām api siddhānāṁ kaśhchin māṁ vetti tattvataḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among thousands and thousands of human beings, one strives for perfection. And even if the perfected ones are fully practicing – perhaps one or so among them comes to truly know Me.

 #### Commentary 

“Jnana” [spiritual Knowledge] is an extremely rare thing; it cannot be had without devotion. And besides human beings, no other living being can even have jnana at all. Even among humans, at most, there may be one among thousands that try to attain perfection – meaning: practice to conquer prana via pranayam in order to attain jnana. Becoming still in the Ajna, after having taken recourse in the brahmanadi via pranayam, is “siddhi” [spiritual attainment]. This “siddhi” is the end of the “karmakanda” [phase of “karma” [spiritual action]]. The attainment of jnana does not happen just by attaining siddhi through “karma” [spiritual action]. “Upasana” [see slokas 7:1 and 7:2] is necessary. If one has become a “siddha” [an adept] and is not fully engaged in upasana, one will definitely fall to Maya's treachery. But if one thinks that just because one is seriously practicing one will attain jnana – meaning: attain the Supreme Self or the Vishnu-Being – that also does not happen. This is because: until the chitta [personal consciousness] is dissolved in the Self, the Goddess Maya spreads her net of delusion and tries to delude the sadhak. Unless there is the force of intense detachment that is powerful enough to go beyond that delusional power, one falls. That is why very few people can know the “tattvatah” [True Essence] of the Self – meaning: the Attribute-free Person that is “I”, Who is separate from the twenty-four elements, and is beyond all substances. One merges into Him. “Sadsattat paraṃ yat” [“That” – which is beyond truth and untruth] – that happens. But if one surrenders oneself to the Feet of Guru Vasudeva [the Lord], if one becomes a devotee, the delusional power of Maya disappears on its own, automatically. One transcends Maya. The sadhak, in the form of Arjuna, has today become devotee and friend. (“Bhakto'se me sakhA cheti” [the devotee is also My friend; it is so].) The sadhak has gone beyond “karma” [spiritual action] and has begun “upasana” [being near the Lord]. That is why Sri Gurudev has now come near the sadhak and is situated in front as the Driver of the sadhak's vehicle. He has removed all doubts of the sadhak. He Himself has taken away Maya. He is no longer allowing the Mayic covering to impede the sadhak's progress. The Lord, after filling the sadhak's antahkarana [personal consciousness] with Power, is manifesting jnana and vijnana all at the same time. Lo! How fortunate is the one who has received this state! That being's life is truly a success and worthy.