#### Prose 

श्रोत्रं चक्षु: स्पर्शनं च रसनं घ्राणमेव च |
अधिष्ठाय मनश्चायं विषयानुपसेवते || 9||
śhrotraṁ chakṣhuḥ sparśhanaṁ cha rasanaṁ ghrāṇam eva cha
adhiṣhṭhāya manaśh chāyaṁ viṣhayān upasevate

 #### Bengali Translation 

This one (jiva), taking recourse in ears, eyes, skin, tongue and nose, and mind, takes in the worldly experience.

 #### Commentary 

Dear sadhak! Put your attention into your “you” that was in the previous bound state, and look one more time. The new body you took on after leaving the body that was cast off – in this, nothing of your “you-ness” changed. As well, there is no change in Prakriti, the mutations of Prakriti or the gunas. The change is only in the “tri” and “panchikaran” [Vedantic perceptions on the change from subtle elements to matter]. The stronger the “karan” [doing- or engagement-oriented modalities] are, the more do you become intoxicated by the deep embrace of ignorance. Look there, in the new body, with new strength, how much more than before the mind is now energetically enjoying the worldly experience by taking recourse to the powerful ears, eyes, nose, tongue and skin. Taking recourse in the senses of hearing, seeing, touching, tasting and smelling – how does the mind experience all of these worldly experiences of sound, touch, sight, taste and smell? It is like the tangled hair of a little boy. Just as, after slowly taking out the dirt from the tangles, the hair stays just as it was and no diminution or growth happens to the hair – for you it is the same. If the Prakritic operations are removed, you are the same Unbound that you ever are.