#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
काम्यानां कर्मणां न्यासं सन्न्यासं कवयो विदु: |
सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं प्राहुस्त्यागं विचक्षणा: || 2||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ
sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ prāhus tyāgaṁ vichakṣhaṇāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “‘Kavi[s]’” [poets; see commentary below for spiritual definition] say that the renunciation of desirous actions is that which is called ‘sannyas.’ The wise/visionary ones call the renunciation of the fruits of all types of actions ‘tyaga.’”

 #### Commentary 

“Sribhagvanuvacha” [the Lord said] – meaning: the discerning through Self-Awareness. Sound, touch, sight, taste, smell – these are the desired things. That is why these are called “kama” [desire[s]]. “Karma” [act] [is] the moving of vayu [vital-force] in the path of Brahman. So it becomes thus: there is the moving of vayu in the path of Brahman, and there is also the slipping off and the reminder of the worldly-experience in their innumerable forms. This state where these two come together is called “kamya karma” [act with desire] ([explained] in Chapter 6, sloka 26). Where one thing cannot be seen twice, and the new arises at every moment – those who live in this place [state] are called “kavi.” Those kavis say “sannyas” indeed is the destruction of the aforementioned “kamya karma.” The form of that sannyas is like this: in the path of Brahman, the moving of vayu is happening; the mind too is coming and going [moving] in union with vayu; but, the aimed place of the mind – the State of Vishnu – the mind is not letting go of attention on that aim. The name of this state is “sannyas.” Kriyavan sadhaks know this very well. And what is the renunciation of all fruits of all actions? But this: when the mind has become intoxicated upon continuously doing Kriya, when Kriya is no longer being remembered by the mind, when mind is locked only in Kutastha Itself, when it is not being dislodged from the State of Vishnu, when it is not coming and going, but because of the effect of practice, vayu is moving in every place in the path of Brahman, and has not yet stopped – meaning: there is the Eternal (the Settledness in Brahman); there is the natural happening (the enjoyment of paravastha); there is no obstacle to karma [the moving of prana], yet the mind is not bound to anything at all – this kind of state is called “the state of the renunciation of the fruits of karma [actions].” The longer that one can stay in this state, the more “tyagi” that person is. The endless abidance [in the Self] is called “[being] tyagi.” Those for whom the perception of Prakriti and Purush is unbroken and steady – they are called “vichakshana” [wise; visionary]. They are the ones who called these aforementioned persons endowed with this state [of renunciation] “tyagi[s].” 