#### Prose 

यज्ञशिष्टाशिन: सन्तो मुच्यन्ते सर्वकिल्बिषै: |
भुञ्जते ते त्वघं पापा ये पचन्त्यात्मकारणात् || 13||
yajña-śhiṣhṭāśhinaḥ santo muchyante sarva-kilbiṣhaiḥ
bhuñjate te tvaghaṁ pāpā ye pachantyātma-kāraṇāt

 #### Bengali Translation 

The sadhus [practitioners] become free of all sins by eating the food of the yagya. But those who commit sin for themselves – those persons of sinful character eat only sin.

 #### Commentary 

Yagya [rite with oblations into fire] is actually pranayam. The stilling of pranas is the end of the yagya. The one who eats of this final part – meaning: the one who stills the prana vital airs and holds them (kumbhak [retention]) in the body – that is the person who is the eater of the food at the end of the yagya. Those who – by stopping prana through that type of kumbhak – are the eaters of the food at the end of the yagya, and are “santa” [saint] (those who – by entering the True Substance with a one-pointed mind – become enraptured) – they are verily the ones who go beyond the restlessness of Prakriti and become Free. Start Footnote -- See the commentary on Chapter 2, sloka 44. Without being a sadhu [practitioner] and just being a partaker at the end of the yagya (showman yogi) does not bring about the firmness of the intellect; therefore, Liberation does not happen. -- End Footnote. But those, who – because of selfish reasons – meaning: those who – succumbing to desire because of wanting to enjoy worldly pleasures – take in (eat) food, water, air and such into the stomach, only “agha” (only the restlessness of mind) takes place in their bodies. Stillness does not come.