#### Prose 

अमानित्वमदम्भित्वमहिंसा क्षान्तिरार्जवम् |
आचार्योपासनं शौचं स्थैर्यमात्मविनिग्रह: || 8||
amānitvam adambhitvam ahinsā kṣhāntir ārjavam
āchāryopāsanaṁ śhauchaṁ sthairyam ātma-vinigrahaḥ

इन्द्रियार्थेषु वैराग्यमनहङ्कार एव च |
जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिदु:खदोषानुदर्शनम् || 9||
indriyārtheṣhu vairāgyam anahankāra eva cha
janma-mṛityu-jarā-vyādhi-duḥkha-doṣhānudarśhanam

असक्तिरनभिष्वङ्ग: पुत्रदारगृहादिषु |
नित्यं च समचित्तत्वमिष्टानिष्टोपपत्तिषु || 10||
asaktir anabhiṣhvaṅgaḥ putra-dāra-gṛihādiṣhu
nityaṁ cha sama-chittatvam iṣhṭāniṣhṭopapattiṣhu

मयि चानन्ययोगेन भक्तिरव्यभिचारिणी |
विविक्तदेशसेवित्वमरतिर्जनसंसदि || 11||
mayi chānanya-yogena bhaktir avyabhichāriṇī
vivikta-deśha-sevitvam aratir jana-sansadi

अध्यात्मज्ञाननित्यत्वं तत्वज्ञानार्थदर्शनम् |
एतज्ज्ञानमिति प्रोक्तमज्ञानं यदतोऽन्यथा || 12||
adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ tattva-jñānārtha-darśhanam
etaj jñānam iti proktam ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā

 #### Bengali Translation 

Not having self-importance, non-deceit, non-violence, compassion/patience, transparency in behavior, service to sadguru, cleanliness in the external and internal, steadiness on the path to liberation, physical self-control; detachment to the worldly experience, being devoid of egotism, being aware of the painful evil of birth, death, old age and illness; non-attachment to children, spouse, home and such, not feeling oneself to be happy or unhappy because of the [happiness or] unhappiness of one’s children and such, being steady-minded in either good or bad occurrences; unwavering devotion to Me through single-minded yoga, residing in solitude, having a dislike for society; full immersion in spiritual knowledge, and being aware of the goal (Liberation) of the knowledge of Truth – it is said that these, numbering twenty, comprise “jnana” [knowledge]. That which is opposite to this [knowledge] is that which is called “ajnana” [ignorance].

 #### Commentary 

When the Presence of the Knower of the field is known, Immortality is attained. That Knower of the field is also the substance to be known. The Lord speaks about the object of knowledge in the very next statement through statements such as “jneyaṃ yattat pravakshyAmi.” In order to know the substance that is to be known, in order to do the practice to know that wisdom, some qualities such as “amaanitva” [not having self-importance] etc. are necessary. Those qualities such as “amaanitva” etc. are stated by the Lord to be “jnana” [knowledge or acquired qualities that are permanent] that is necessary for the practice of attaining the Knowledge of Truth. Those [qualities] are [or: that “knowledge” is comprised of]:
 
(1) “Amaanitva” [not having self-importance/non-vanity]: “maan” [self-importance/self-orientedness] means delusion of oneself. All of the delusion that there is with oneself is that which is called “sambhram” [associated delusion] or “maan.” Allowing “whatever I am not” to enter into “I” is called “maan.” When that total delusion or acceptance [of the delusion] has an “a” come and stand in front of it [prefix], then the meaning of that acceptance [of self-oriented delusion], or the total delusion itself disappears, and a new meaning appears. Abiding at all times in this new state [of not having self-importance] is called “amaanitva” [being unaware of self-importance]. (2) “Adambhitva” [non-deception; personal transparency] – “dambha” means “deception” – meaning: what I am actually not – showing that sort of pretense (showing off) and endeavoring to cheat/fool people with that pretense is called “dambha” [deceitfulness]. Remaining at all times devoid of the activities of that state is called “adambhitva” [being in a state of non-deception; being personally transparent]. (3) “Ahimsa” [non-aggression] – the non-arising of maleficent functionalities within one’s inner being is called “ahimsa.” (4) “Kshanti” [forgiveness] – the forgiveness that is given even towards the wrongful acts of enemy-powers is that which is called “kshanti.” (5) “Aarjav” means – being simple and honest. (6) Taking refuge in and serving the teacher is called “acharyopasana.” (7) “Shaucha” [cleanliness] – getting rid of the impurities of mind/heart is called “shaucha” [purity]. Sound, touch, sight, taste, smell – these five worldly experiences, and ignorance, pride, attraction, repulsion, fear of death – these five afflictions – [these ten together] are called “impurities of the mind.” Washing off the impurities of the body with water is also called “shaucha” [cleanliness]. Becoming clean is also called “shaucha.” And during the state when the mind is still, and no vrittis [inner activities] arise – the unchanging Stillness that is experienced – that is that which is called “shaucha.” (8) Remaining unmoved even at the time of the events of anxiety is called “sthairya” [steadiness]. (9) The effort to destroy body-vanity/body-identification through special Kriya is that which is called “atmavinigraha” [effort to not hold on to self-orientedness]. (10) “Indiryartheshu vairagya” [detachment from the matters of the sense-organs] – meaning: the experiencing of the worldly experience through the ten sense-organs, and the enjoyment/partaking in them – exercising detachment towards them. (11) Having an acute perception regarding the painful wrongness of “janma-mrityu-jara-vyadhi” [birth, death, old-age and illness] – birth itself is pain/sorrow, as there is pain in the womb, and the pain of birthing-labor is full of suffering. That is why it belongs to “wrongness.” Similarly, the pain of death is an extreme suffering; thus, this also belongs to pain and wrongness. In old age, the mental acumen and the vital force diminish; therefore, this is also pain and wrongness. Similarly, illness is also pain and wrongness. For the jiva [embodied soul] the experiencing of all of these sufferings is inevitable. When there is repeated discussion/analysis about these sufferings and wrongs, detachment towards the body and its sense-organs comes about. Effort ensues towards the renunciation of self-orientedness, and in the end, the Self is witnessed. Therefore, whenever whichever vritti [active tendency] rises within the antahkarana [mind as a whole], one should see that very vritti as the seed of rebirth. Ascertaining that very vritti as the pain of birth, the pain of death, the pain of illness, and thereby destroying that vritti is also jnana-sadhana, and that is why [this awareness of the pains and wrongs] is addressed by the word “knowledge.”
 
“Aasakti” [addiction; attachment] etc.: the best of the things of enjoyment in samsara are children, spouse, and property and such. (13) Not being “aasakta” [addicted; attached] to them and (14) to totally renounce all desire to be together with them. (15) Not having any impressions take hold in the chitta [personal consciousness] by not taking in good or bad when they come about; the chitta remains as is; remaining vigilant in this kind of way at all times.
 
(16) It is “I” Who am “Rama” [the Delightful One; the Beloved] – the unbroken endeavor of “avyabhicharini” [non-adulterous] devotion towards that “I”. (“Vyabhichar” [deviant nature; adulterer-nature] is the name of active functionalities operating in the direction of the worldly experience.) (17) Desolate riversides, mountains, solitary places, cremation grounds or places near them, places of battle,6 sacred places – these are secluded lands and places of sadhana [spiritual practice]; although naturally clean, [further] cleaning these places with cow-dung and such and making use of [these places for spiritual practice]. So goes it for the external. And for the internal: those places such as Muladhar etc. that are in the brahmanadi within the sushumna are the secluded lands; making use of them with the guru-instructed methods. (18) The kinds of people who do not have [spiritual] culture – stopping intimate and distant [or: inner and outer] behavior with them – meaning: not associating with them.
 
[6 Translators’ note: The word used here is “ranasthal” which means “place[s] of battle.” It is very possible that the intended word was “aranyasthal” which has a similar combination of letters with a slight variation and which means “forest dwelling[s].” “Aranyasthal” would fall into the category of “secluded places.”]
 
(19) To know that the “I-ness” pervades every atom and particle of the world – from Brahmaa [the creator] to inanimate objects and to the end of creation – fully digesting this understanding with total surety is called “adhyAtmajnAnanityatvam” [ever being in spiritual knowledge]. (20) “Tattva” [substance; science in the complete sense] is the universe. The goal of the knowledge of this tattva is Brahman, the One Who is Supreme, without any conflict. To merge these two and make them one, and ignoring the way of samsara is “tattvajnAnArtha-darshana” [seeing the goal of the knowledge of tattva]. These twenty are those that are called “jnana” [necessary knowledge]. And whatever is opposite to this – that is that which is called “ajnana” [non-knowledge; ignorance]. (“tattvajne’si yadA pArtha tuShNimbhava tadA sakhe. yaddṛShTaṃ vishvaroopaṃ me mAyAmAtrAṃ tadeva hi. tena bhrAnto’si kaunteya svasvaroopaṃ vichintaya. muhyanti mArayA mooDhAstastvajnA mohavarjitAh.)