#### Prose 

बुद्धियुक्तो जहातीह उभे सुकृतदुष्कृते |
तस्माद्योगाय युज्यस्व योग: कर्मसु कौशलम् || 50||
buddhi-yukto jahātīha ubhe sukṛita-duṣhkṛite
tasmād yogāya yujyasva yogaḥ karmasu kauśhalam

 #### Bengali Translation 

If one becomes united with Brahman through the intellect, both good and bad works are cast off in this very lifetime. Therefore, take care to practice for this union. Applying special techniques to/in the act is that which is called “yoga.”

 #### Commentary 

When the intellect gets locked in that Bindu, because the awareness of the universe disappears, one becomes Unmoving and Brahman-filled. That is the state that is known as “Chaitanya-Samadhi.” At that time, because there is no partaker of bodily things, all of the prarabdha karmas [karmas bound to this bodily existence], good and bad, because they can no longer find a home in the jiva, are destroyed automatically and spontaneously. And they never sprout again. It is to get this kind of release that one needs to perform yoga. The application of techniques to/in the act is that which is called “yoga.” No one can hold the force of an enormous torrent of water, but with certain techniques, the flows of that torrent can be directed in different directions, guided into different currents, and gradually brought under control. The actions, which are taking place in the form of the torrent of prana that is naturally going on in the body of the jiva – through the use of a special technique, — Begin Footnote. — What this technique is – that cannot be known except from the teachings of guru. “Shishyaste'haṃ shAdhi mAṃ tvAṃ prapannaṃ” [I am your disciple. Guide/correct me. I surrender to you.] – when one says this devotedly in the silent place within, without being disingenuous and without attachment [to the outcome], guru appears in the subtle body and reveals that technique within. No matter how much instruction guru gives in the physical body, if the disciple is not fit [for the instruction], he/she cannot even comprehend it. Only by performing “the act” according to guru's instructions – because the inner veils gradually become evident – the appropriate technique/s to destroy those [veils] become taught/learned spontaneously. Imagination, inference/logic – it is not possible at all to know that by these at all. It cannot be even spoken about properly in words. If one tries to speak about it, [the teaching] remains in the imagination alone, like the stories told in the Upanishads. — End Footnote. — that torrent of prana can be directed in different directions, and making it gradually finer and finer, can be brought under one's control. Later, the state that comes about after offering oblations of that prana into the Fire of the Self – that is what is known, verily, as yoga. 