#### Prose 

अन्तवत्तु फलं तेषां तद्भवत्यल्पमेधसाम् |
देवान्देवयजो यान्ति मद्भक्ता यान्ति मामपि || 23||
antavat tu phalaṁ teṣhāṁ tad bhavatyalpa-medhasām
devān deva-yajo yānti mad-bhaktā yānti mām api

 #### Bengali Translation 

However, for those persons with small understanding, those fruits do not last (do not remain forever). Those who worship the gods go to the gods. Those who are devoted to Me come directly to Me.

 #### Commentary 

Only the “I” is actually the Infinite One without beginning. This phenomenal Cosmos arises actually from “I”. And in the realm of time, dissolves back into “I”. Therefore, even though the gods are the highest beings in the Cosmos, they do not remain forever. Due to the power of time, everything has to dissolve/resolve. But the One Who Is “I”, the Supreme Self or the Supreme Lord, has no dissolution. He is Eternal, Immaculate, Aware and Free. The fruits that are gained by not resorting to Him due to erroneous perception and worshipping other gods, even though those are bestowed actually by the Supreme Lord Himself, because of the worshipping of the limited, the rewards do not last. And more, worshipping gods leads to the attaining of the state of those gods in the realm of the gods. Therefore, after the enjoyments of the fruits have ended, one again has to return to the earth-world. But if one worships the Supreme Lord, one gets the Infinite, Supreme Bliss that is the Supreme Lord Himself, and one no longer has to return to the earth-world. The amount of exertion (penitence) that is necessary for the worship of gods – the effort necessary for the worship of the Supreme Lord is the same – not more. But even though the same effort is made by both, the worshippers of gods do not attain the Destination of the Self; they do not gain the Infinite Reward. Because they do not understand this due to limited understanding, they desire and become engaged in the worship of gods. (See the next sloka.) 