#### Prose 

यत: प्रवृत्तिर्भूतानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम् |
स्वकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धिं विन्दति मानव: || 46||
yataḥ pravṛittir bhūtānāṁ yena sarvam idaṁ tatam
sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarchya siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

That from which the living beings arise, the One by Whom all of this is pervaded – by glorifying (worshipping) That One through one’s own natural duties, the human being attains perfection.  

 #### Commentary 

God is One without a second. He is in all beings and is Omnipresent. He is the Cause of creation. Thus it is from Him that the living come forth – meaning: arise. And it is only He Who is the ordainer of the fruits of actions. That is why it is from Him that the living beings get their engagements – meaning: endeavors. This means: the karma-bound jiva [individual soul], in order to experience the fruits of previously done actions, is born in appropriate lineages according to the Lord’s infallible justice, and gets the mental tendencies according to that [lineage].
 
God, according to the divisions of the qualities in actions, has created brahmin, kshatriya, vaishya and shudra – these four castes, and has ordained the natural duties for each of the castes. The caste in which the human being is born, such as brahmin etc. – that is due to the fruits of one’s own actions, but, due to the ordinance of the Lord, it [the birth] is to experience one’s previously gathered fruits of actions. Immediately upon taking on the body, the sanchit karma [previously gathered actions] that come forth to face one to bear fruits – those are called “prarabdha karma” [previously bound karma] – meaning: the karma that is starting to bear fruit [right away]. The body itself is the whole of prarabdha karma. Prarabdha karma is not removed unless it is experienced. But if that experiencing is done without attachment, when there is always an unattached mind, the karma is destroyed. Otherwise, if one does it with attachment or hatefulness, one again has to fall into bondage. That is why there is the system of performing acts and experiencing prarabdha without affection and repulsion. Thus, brahmin, kshatriya, vaishya, shudra – no matter in which lineage one takes birth, prarabdha has to be experienced. No one escapes from prarabdha, whether one is a saint or an infidel. Prarabdha is the fruit of one’s own [previous] actions. Therefore, this [prarabdha] itself can be called “svakarma” [one’s ordained duty]. If I am born in the lineage of shudras, then it will have to be understood that this is the fruit of my own actions or the ordainment of the Lord. Knowing this, and thereby not despising the duties or ways of being shudra, or not being indignant, I have to follow that path of action without despondency. That shudra-karma [duties of shudras] is at that time my “svakarma” [my ordained duty]. In whichever caste I take birth, the duty of that caste is my “svakarma.” By remaining detached and remaining engaged in one’s own duty, and thereby taking recourse in efforts towards the divine, one has to worship that One Who is within all and pervades all. Mind and energy have to be thrown into Him according to the methods instructed by guru. It is only then that I will gradually progress, become purified in heart, and attain perfection. This is the only way for humans to attain perfection – meaning: remaining in one’s duty and worshipping the Lord [while doing one’s duty]. All castes have the same system. And if I, no matter in which caste I take birth, despise and abandon the duties of that caste and do the work of another caste, and being under the power of egotism, “I am also a human being” – thinking this – try to become the same as of a higher caste – then, whether I worship God or whatever it is that I do – far be it to talk about cutting the bindings of my karma [actions and their fruits], they will only go on increasing. This is because: even if I am praised very much by people outside, my mind will not leave me. At that time, in my consciousness, my impressions of my despising and the impressions of egotism will rise up, and will for sure and infallibly attack with doubt and grief. And at the time of death as well, I will fall to the magnetism of those impressions. Thus, then I will be tied up by an abominable bondage, and (Chapter 16, sloka 19 [of the Bhagavad Gita]) accordingly, I will be thrown into a demonic womb.
 
God succumbs to devotion alone. In the path of devotion, there is no separation of rightfulness. This is because: in this, there are no particular acts that have to be performed that need certain strengths or capabilities. In this there simply has to be resolute faith from a pure heart. Therefore, everyone can remain doing the duties of one’s own caste and practice devotion. With this power of devotion, “striyo vaishyAstathA shudrAste’pi yAnti parAṃ gatim” [even women, vaishyas, shudras attain the supreme destination]. Doing each one’s own duties – meaning: one has to practice devotion while being engaged in stoically doing the duties of one’s own caste. It does not happen in another way. “Lojja, ghrina, bhoy, tin thaakte noy” [Bengali phrase regularly said by Sri Ramakrishna Paramhansa, meaning: shame, despising, fear – if these three are there, then it will not happen]. Just as: if one falls into unfathomable water, one has to take recourse in that water itself, keep an aim for the shore and swim towards the shore; it is only then that one can get out of the water. There is no other way to get out of the water without taking recourse in the water. In the same way, it is by taking recourse in one’s own duty that one must keep the aim on God and become engaged in worship. Then karma [action and fruit] is relinquished.
 
To sum it up, in order for the human being to attain perfection, two things have to be done. The first is to be engaged in one’s own duty without having a sense of either honor or dishonor, and with having an unattached mind at all times. The second is worshipping, in that way [while being dutiful], God Who is in every heart and Omnipresent. This worshipping is a worshipping of great magnanimity. Here, the Lord does not mention any name or form of a deity to be worshipped. He only expressed, “yatah pravṛttirbhootAnAṃ yena sarvamidam tatam” [the one from whom all beings come forth, who pervades all this]. Here there is not a bit of a feeling of any religious order/lineage. By the usage of the word “pravritti” [endeavor; perform], it can be understood that “endeavoring” on the path of “nivritti” [spiritual withdrawal] through the performance of [spiritual] yoga is the method of this worship. Thus, effort according to the work is required. Through the effort in performing Kriya, and thereby worshipping that All-pervading, All power-causing One Who resides in all beings, perfection is attained.