#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये रथं स्थापय मेऽच्युत || 21||
arjuna uvācha
senayor ubhayor madhye rathaṁ sthāpaya me ’chyuta

यावदेतान्निरीक्षेऽहं योद्धुकामानवस्थितान् |
कैर्मया सह योद्धव्यमस्मिन् रणसमुद्यमे || 22||
yāvadetān nirīkṣhe ’haṁ yoddhu-kāmān avasthitān
kairmayā saha yoddhavyam asmin raṇa-samudyame

योत्स्यमानानवेक्षेऽहं य एतेऽत्र समागता: |
धार्तराष्ट्रस्य दुर्बुद्धेर्युद्धे प्रियचिकीर्षव: || 23||
yotsyamānān avekṣhe ’haṁ ya ete ’tra samāgatāḥ
dhārtarāṣhṭrasya durbuddher yuddhe priya-chikīrṣhavaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said: O Achyuta [the Imperishable/Imperturbable] [Sri Krishna], place my chariot in the middle of the soldiers of both sides. These [persons] who are present here desiring to fight in this war – alongside whom (among them) will I be fighting? Let me have a full view of them. And more, those evil-minded ones in this war who are here for the benefit of Duryodhana – let me see who all of these warriors are as well.

 #### Commentary 

“Arjuna uvAcha” [Arjuna said]: Now the “sreekṛShNArjuna saṃvAd” [dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna; also: a name for the Bhagavad Gita] begins. That is why it is being said “arjuna uvAcha” = Arjuna said. “Arjuna” (“a” + “rajju” [rope] + “na”; see the commentary in the slokas in the 8th Chapter) – one who is not free from bonds. The “bound-by-samsara state” of the jiva is called “Arjuna.” Here, it is actually the sadhak that is being called “Arjuna.” In the sadhana-life of the sadhak, he/she has to experience many different kinds of states/conditions of being; those particular and individual states/conditions have particular and individual names given to them. To understand this Gita – which is the total essence of the scriptures of yoga – generally speaking, there are three states of the sadhak. Those are:
 
The first state is – from having received initiation according to traditional injunctions and having taken up “dvijatva” [the spiritual station in life], beginning at the first stage of Kriya and up to the point of coming to the entrance of the superfine lotus-stem of the subtle path of the sushumna. This state is totally full of restlessness [or: movements in the mind]. This is what is called the sadhak's “child” [or: novice] state. In this state, with the power of guru's grace, an upward pull (meaning: upwardly attracted mind) happens, and as the sadhak goes on doing Kriya, strength is continuously gathered in the heart. Only this much happens [in this state]. It is this state that in the Mahabharata is called “the Pandava's time of living in the forest.”
 
Then – the second state. Vanquishing the strength of the mind's restlessness via the practice of Kriya, and diminishing external awareness [during meditation], [and thus] entering the mind into that subtler than the subtlest path of the sushumna is what is called the second state of the sadhak. At that time – the particular kinds of states that happen to the body, and the particular kinds of feelings/experiences that rise up in the mind, as well as the particular things that can be seen or heard – all of that is what has been called by the name of “Gita” - in the form of “the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna.” In this state, the sadhak is only being referred to as “Arjuna.” The reason is: although there is [still] the bondage of the fruits of the karma because of desires not having been finished, because of being in the practice of Kriya in the rajo-sattva guna, all of the sadhak's actions are pure. (It has also been written in the Mahabharata that the third Pandava was named “Arjuna” because all of his actions were pure.) Even though the sadhak who has attained this state (meaning: arriving at the Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra as described in the 1st sloka [of Chapter 1] is being addressed only as “Arjuna,” in the “relationship-theater” within the Gita, [the sadhak] is also called by the names of “Partha,” “Dhananjaya,” “Pandava,” “Kaunteya,” “Sabyasachi” etc. The reason for this is: it is seen that even after arriving at the Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra, [the sadhak's] mind first showed weakness [in the manner of] having attachment and affection [towards the enemies]. And [as well], from time to time, the state of detachment also showed itself. Those particular states of mind taking place at particular times are expressed through the various names by which [the sadhak] is called. And another thing: when this [second] state comes about, Kutastha Chaitanya “Sri Krishna” comes and stands in front of the sadhak as the “driver” [specifically “charioteer” in the Gita/Mahabharata]. At this time, whatever the sadhak's mind wants to know – the answers to those become revealed in his very own consciousness via the Powerful Light of Kutastha Chaitanya. This is why Krishna is “sarathi” [charioteer]. And [the sadhak] also hears many kinds of teachings from the Ethers (teachings coming from no “form”; or: supernatural teachings). Seeing and hearing all of those things, [the sadhak] becomes astonished and stupefied. (That is what is expressed in the 11th chapter.)
 
After this – the third state.  Upon going on practicing Kriya while in that second state and gradually going farther and farther up in the brahmanadi in the sushumna, when the Bhishma-represented ignorance-ensconced “me-ness” (the “I am the body” idea) becomes inactive, then the sadhak experiences a type of samadhi. During the experience of that samadhi, [the sadhak's] sadhana efforts stop, and the accumulated karmas in the form of “vikarma” [that which forces one to act], in order to bring forth their fruits, draw the sadhak again and again while in his benumbed state, bring him down [from samadhi and the inner states] and altogether throw him/her into the external matters of the world. For this reason, [the sadhak] has to have discipline of mind at that time. Because there is no Light of Consciousness visible at that time, [the sadhak] has to take the help of his/her powers of memory and go on practicing Kriya blindly, and thereupon use the power of the intuitive experiential perception that he/she has acquired through sadhana, and continue to observe the practice of his/her essential sadhana. In the Gita, the sadhak is called “Dhritarashtra” [who is blind] when this state comes to be. The first sloka [of Chapter 1] refers to this state of the sadhak.
 
It is written in the Mahabharata that Dhritarashtra is Arjuna's eldest paternal uncle. So it seems like it is a stretch of the imagination to call the same sadhak one time as “Arjuna” and another time as “Dhritarashtra.” But one must remember that the Gita is a scripture of yoga. In whichever of the twenty-four essential elements, and at whichever time, that the power of consciousness does its sporting, that particular [element] at that particular time becomes enjoined with [the power of] consciousness, and [thus] goes on doing its [the particular element's] own particular work automatically. All these activities that there are – they are happening in the same body in different ways because of the differences in vrittis [aspects that cause action]. Thus, in that situation [or: in that place/body] there are no “relationships” whatsoever such as “father-mother-relative-kin [etc.].” In order to describe the experiences/scenery, all of those “relationships” are made up in order to construct the story. This is actually the main difference between a scripture of yoga and a historical account.
 
Important note: (1) In order to understand the Gita, it is necessary to understand all of those three states. Besides those three states, there are many other states for the sadhak. The last of them is the “Mahaprasthan Kaal” [the time of the great journey/death]. Its way/method is described in the eighth chapter. Speaking about all of those matters here [in this chapter] is unnecessary.
 
Important note: (2) The second state is “the dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna.” For this reason the statements by Arjuna and the Lord will have to be understood according to being in this [second] state. And the third state is “the dialogue between Dhritarashtra and Sanjaya.” Therefore, the statements made by Sanjaya will have to be understood according to being in this [third] state.
 
Now the meaning of slokas 21, 22, and 23 [of Chapter 1] are being stated:
 
Upon reaching exactly the middle of the entrance of the sushumna, the sadhak sees the Beautiful and Powerful Light of the Kutastha as “Achyuta” - meaning: Still, Steady, yet full of the Power of Attraction. As that happens, [the sadhak's] power of looking is completely caught in That, and his/her sight is not moving in any other direction. It has become still. (This is the “Achyuta” state.) Even though the sadhak's sight is still in this way, because his/her desires for worldly ways have not been finished, he/she falls to restlessness as well. But because of following guru's teachings, [the sadhak] also has acquired the strength to stand in the middle of the two opposing forces of pravritti-nivritti or attachment-detachment (in the middle of the soldiers from both sides). (This experience is stated in the 21st sloka [of Chapter 1]. At this time, the sadhak is thinking, “Let me see once – which of the vrittis are now banded together and are here as my rivals [and] which of the ones will I be fighting alongside? And which are the vrittis that keep the vrittis of worldly desires strong that have now arisen in the mind?” (23rd sloka [of Chapter 1])
