#### Prose 

भूतग्राम: स एवायं भूत्वा भूत्वा प्रलीयते |
रात्र्यागमेऽवश: पार्थ प्रभवत्यहरागमे || 19||
bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate
rātryāgame ’vaśhaḥ pārtha prabhavatyahar-āgame

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha! These are the beings that are made powerless, and thereby taking birth again and again, they are destroyed at the coming of the night and again are born at the coming of the day.

 #### Commentary 

“Grama” [village; see first line of sloka above] means where five or so number of people live together – meaning: the body. That body is again called “me.” Oh dear! What a problem! This “I” is the All-knowing source of all power; instead of being That, I got dressed up as this village-body. On top of that, this body is dying and being born, being born and dying – again and again. I have become powerless under the power of Prakriti. The paralysis of the night has locked me up, covered me up. How was this done to me? Wonder of wonders! O miserly sadhak! Now see! That addiction to enjoyments that you are not able to leave behind – take a look and see for once the “fun” of that. Now see again: as soon as “Aham” [“I”] comes – meaning: the light like the kind that comes forth just before sunrise on the Eastern sky – just when that kind of light comes forth [within] – your “day” has arrived – meaning: you witness your Original Self. But you are actually the same; there is only the difference in the direction of perception – the sight in the direction of creation, and the sight in the direction of You.