#### Prose 

अक्षराणामकारोऽस्मि द्वन्द्व: सामासिकस्य च |
अहमेवाक्षय: कालो धाताहं विश्वतोमुख: || 33||
akṣharāṇām a-kāro ’smi dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya cha
aham evākṣhayaḥ kālo dhātāhaṁ viśhvato-mukhaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among “varnas,” I am the form of “a”. Among “samaas,” I am “dvandva.” I, indeed, am the unending time, and all fruits of actions are presided over by Me.

 #### Commentary 

All of the symbols of vowels and consonants are individual letters. The letters that can be completely pronounced without the help of other letters are called “vowels” – such as: “a”, “i”, “u” etc. And the letters that cannot be fully pronounced without the help of vowels – those are consonants – such as “k[a],” “kh[a],” “g[a]” etc. Among all of these letters “I” am the letter “a.” This is because within the beginning, middle and end of every letter, “a” is present. But “a” is itself by itself. That which is Itself by Itself – that is “I”.
 
Dvadvah sAmAsikasya [among “samaas,” I am “dvandva”] – whatever you see in this creation – none of them are great. That is why one keeps another down and becomes adversely determined to show oneself as greater than another. But the One Who is actually Great – because His Greatness is complete and perfect, there is no need to show it. As well, whoever mingles with a great, becomes great. Dear sadhak! When you were in the intoxication of Maya, compare that state to this State of Settledness in Brahman. In that state of being intoxicated by Maya, you did not have any awareness of this State [of Settledness in Brahman]. Only the primacy of Maya was evident. Such as this Brahman-ness is, It was dormant at that time. That is why It was not [at that time] dressed up as “dvandva” [dual; with awareness of Divinity in the midst of illusion]. Even at that time, Maya was not without Brahman. But she kept herself as primary, and suppressed Brahman. And now? Now you are equally aware of both Brahman and Maya. This “becoming one” of these two, where one is not predominant, where neither is greater or smaller – becoming one in this way is called “samaas.” And keeping the primacy of all intact, and experiencing the oneness of all – that is called “dvandva samas” [experiencing Divinity in all]. Even though “I” am without activity, the active ones of Maya (those endowed with Maya), while remaining in Me, are showing each’s primacy; yet, they are not being separated from Me. Even though “I” am the Great, I am not causing any obstacles to their predominance. I am abiding as blended in with everyone. It looks as if “I” am coming about because of their being. This is “dvandva” [individual worshipping the Divine as dual]. It is in this state that knowledge is fully revealed. That is why among “samaas,” “I” am “dvandva.”
 
Ahamevakshayah kAlah [I am the unending time] – This time that is in existence in an unbroken way – when analysts cut it up into separate numbers of types – such as “kalaa,” “kaashtha,” “kshana,” “lava” [these are names for different and specific durations of time] – just as this does not corrupt the endlessness of time – similarly, when “I” is mentioned in relation to past and future, it does create any lack in the present-ness of “I”. Thus, “I” am both free of time and at the same time “I” am also the resting place for the arising of time. (Dear sadhak! You and your State of Settledness in Brahman. Examine this and see.)
 
DhAtA’haṃ vishvatomukhah [I am the Holder/Bearer of the mouth of the cosmos] – “dhata” means “one who holds/bears.” And the word “aham” means “I”. It is “I” Who am holding this creation – therefore, “I” am “dhata.” When the ego “I” is gone – it is then that this creation disappears. Thus, “I” am the director, ruler or the operator of this creation. That which is bound by limitation, which deteriorates – that is that which is called “body.” When the identification/vanity of “I” is put upon this body, the creation appears. “Vishva” [cosmos; universe] – “vi” = “vishesh” [something special; something particular]; “shva” = the dawn-time of the next day. Before this dawn-time of the next day, in-between, in the form of night, there is an “avyakta” [unexpressed] or “mrityu” [death] state. Just as there is ignorance in the form of sleep that takes place after the day is over, in the same way, there is the state  of “avyakta” [unexpressed; unaware] after the end of life. Just as at the end of the night there is re-emergence at dawn, similarly, after death, there is the taking up of rebirth. Both of these are called “the dawn-time of the next day.” This continuous movement of the expressed/manifested [life-state] and the unexpressed [death-state] that goes on happening again and again – this is that which is called “vishva” [cosmos; universe]. “Mukh” [mouth; face] means a door for entering and leaving. Because at the time of dissolution, this cosmos enters “I” and at the beginning of an epoch, goes back out from “I”, “I” am the “mukh” [mouth; entrance and exit] of “vishvato” [everything in the cosmos] (“sarvato” [all that there is in creation]), like the flower and fruit in a tree. Dear sadhak! There is no more effort needed to make you know/understand. If you look at creation when seated in the “True ‘I’,” everything will be directly visible to you. Look!