#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
इदं शरीरं कौन्तेय क्षेत्रमित्यभिधीयते |
एतद्यो वेत्ति तं प्राहु: क्षेत्रज्ञ इति तद्विद: || 2||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
idaṁ śharīraṁ kaunteya kṣhetram ity abhidhīyate
etad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ kṣhetra-jña iti tad-vidaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! This body is known by the name “kshetra” [field]. The one who knows this [body] (meaning: the one who is its knower and is present as its witness) – the knowers of the Self call that being “kshetrajna” [knower of the field].”

 #### Commentary 

This body is called “kshetra” [field]. The reason is this: just as when a seed is planted on a field, it grows with the aid of the atmosphere, according to the particular qualities of the soil and the acts of the farmer, and thereby, a result that is according to the nature of the seed comes forth – similarly, in this body too (for sure the fruits of karma [actions] come about, but even besides that), when the guru-given seed is sown, through prana-yoga, the influence of spiritual desire, the operations of the gunas and their subsequent results, the desired fruit comes forth. The spiritually knowledgeable ones, after investigating the workings and causalities of this body, have observed that this [body] is built on twenty-four substances, and that it has: three types of forms – physical, subtle and causal; five types of sheaths – “annamaya” [food-sheath], “pranamaya” [prana-sheath], “manomaya” [mind-sheath], “vijnanamaya” [intellect-sheath] and “anandamaya” [bliss-sheath]; and three types of states – waking, dreaming and dreamless/deep sleep. They have also witnessed that – apart from the physical, subtle and causal forms, and beyond the five sheaths – there is One Who is Satchitananda [Truth-Consciousness-Bliss] Itself, One Who is the witness of the three states. That is the One Who is called “Atma” [Self]. It is That Being that is the “I” of the Cosmos – meaning: the Knower and the Witness. “Ahameko’pi sookshmashcha jnAtA sAkshee sadavyayah” [I am verily the one who is the subtle and the ever-undiminished knower and witness]. This “aham” [“I”; see first word of the preceding Sanskrit phrase] is verily the “knower” in the statement “etadyo vetti” [the one who knows this; see second line of sloka 13:2 above]. Thus, the spiritually knowledgeable ones call that One “kshetrajna” [knower of the filed]. — Begin Footnote. — But the sadhak [aspirant] who, while endeavoring to gain self-knowledge through the practice of sadhana, goes on ascertaining knowledge about this body from head to toe – that person is also “kshetrajna” [knower of the field]. This is because that person, while going on endeavoring to merge his/her consciousness in that “I”, [in due course] attains that Self, and becomes that “I”. Srimat Shankaracharya and Sridharswami [historically renowned spiritual scholars], in their commentaries to this sloka, have spoken about this particular type of “kshetrajna” [the enquiring aspirant as the “knower”]. However, regarding the next sloka [13:3 of the Bhagavad Gita], when commenting on the Lord’s statement – “kshetrajnaṃchApi mAṃ viddhi” [know that I am the knower of the field[s]], Shankaracharya deva says that it is not enough to know just that little bit about the “kshetrajna” [the aspirant as the knower of the field[s]]; the One Who presides on all fields as the Supreme God, Who is One without a second – that is the One Who is [the Ultimate] “Kshetrajna” [Knower of the field[s]. It is only then [that the knowledge is revealed] that both [aspirant and God] are the “knowers of the field[s]]; the sadhak who is knowledgeable in the science of the body is “kshetrajna,” and the Supreme God is “Kshetrajna” as well. In sloka 4 [of Chapter 13 of the Bhagavad Gita], the Lord says that He will speak about “sa cha yo yat prabhAbhashcha” [who that is and how that one’s presence is], but nowhere in the chapter does He clearly speak about the signs of the “kshetrajna.” While not speaking such [the signs of the “kshetrajna”], what He did is this: He said that certain qualities like humility and such are knowledge/realizations brought about by jnana-sadhana, and later, through slokas such as “jneya yattat prvakshyAmi” [I shall tell you about that which is to be known] etc., He described the signs of the object of knowledge. Through this, the answers to Arjuna’s questions regarding knowledge and the object of knowledge were given, and, as well, the identity of the knower of the field was also described. By this, it can be surmised that the one who has the qualities/realizations of jnana-sadhana such as humility, etc. – later, as one becomes adept at the yoga of the object of knowledge and the application of such knowledge, and becomes “sannyasi” [extinguished in the Self] and a “knowledgeable one” – that one is also “kshetrajna” – the sadhak who is the knower of the science of the body and the One who is the Pure “Knower of the field[s],” by knowing Whose Presence, Immortality is attained. That is verily That which is to be known. That One’s signs and such are stated in slokas 13 to 18 [of Chapter 13 of the Bhagavad Gita] through [statements] such as “anAdimaṃ paraṃ brahma” [the Beginning-less Supreme Absolute]. The sadhak should remember that the Lord’s explanation of the two Prakritis, “para” and “apara,” in Chapter 7 [of the Bhagavad Gita] are [actually] stated [as well] in two places in this Chapter [13 of the Bhagavad Gita], respectively as “kshetra” [field] and “kshetrajna” [knower of the field], and “Prakriti” and “Purush.” The names are completely different. The differences among [the subjects] are minimal. — End Footnote. —
The matters about the body that have been just stated – in order to make one understand this, and [as well], in relation to this, the description of the field that is in the sixth and seventh slokas – in order to make [all of] that easier to understand, a summarized version of Srimat Shankaracharya’s elucidations about the process of emergence of the twenty-four substances in this body, [his] explanations regarding the physical, subtle and causal bodies, and [his] teachings on the five sheaths and the three states of being is presented herewith.
 
When speaking about the process of emergence of the [primal] substances, the venerable Shankaracharya, right at the start, said, “brahmAshrayA sattvarajastamoguNAtmikA mAyA asti” [being situated in Brahman is the sattva-rajas-tamas-guna-endowed Maya]. It was necessary to accept this bit in order to speak about the process of emergence [of the substances]. This bit is indeed that which is called “the aspect of accepting that which is in the scriptures” or “the acceptance of an axiom.” It is not at all possible for any elucidation to take place within any scripture without the acceptance of certain axioms, [which is done for] the purpose of answering opposing methodologies. That these types of axioms are true can be understood/seen [without analysis], but they cannot be explained by proof. For this reason, these [axioms] are called “aprameya satya” [truths that are not to be proved].
 
Space is realized simultaneously with that tri-guna-endowed Maya. After that: air [appears] from space, fire [appears] from air, liquidity (water) [appears] from fire, and earth [appears] from liquidity – in this way, the emergence of the five elements takes place.
 
In these five elements, from the sattvic part of space, simultaneously [with the emergence of space], the hearing-sense is realized; from the sattvic part of air, simultaneously [with the emergence of air], the touch-sense is realized; from the sattvic part of fire, simultaneously [with the emergence of fire], the sight-sense is realized, from the sattvic part of water, simultaneously [with the emergence of water], the taste-sense is realized; and, from the sattvic part of earth, simultaneously [with the emergence of earth], the scent-sense is realized.
 
In these five elements, from the rajasic part of space, simultaneously [with the emergence of space], the speech-sense organ is realized; from the rajasic part of air, simultaneously [with the emergence of air], the hand/hands-sense-organ is realized; from the rajasic part of fire, simultaneously [with the emergence of fire], the foot/feet-sense-organ is realized; from the rajasic part of water, simultaneously [with the emergence of water], the sex-organ/urinary-sense organ is realized; and from the rajasic part of earth, simultaneously [with the emergence of earth], the anus-sense-organ is realized.
 
From the tamasic part of all of these five elements comes forth the “panchikaran” [the transformation of the senses from their subtle to their gross forms] of the five elements with their five types of activities – in the following way.
 
The tamasic part of all of these five great elements [and “panchikaran”]: takes every one of these elements and divides each of them into two halves [making a total of ten halves]. Keeping five of these halves unaltered, divide the other five halves equally into four parts. Join the four divisions of each of the latter-stated five halves into each of the first five [unaltered] halves, [and with every such joining,] leave out the part that is the same element as the element to which a group of four are being joined [for example: fire, water, air and earth become joined to the unaltered half of space; the latter-divided space-fragment is not included]. This makes the “panchikaran.” Through “panchikaran,” physicality is attained, and therefore, the senses can function/grasp. In the “non-panchikaran” state, because [the senses are in their] subtle [condition], they cannot function/grasp. In the “panchikaran” state, all elements are mixed together. That is to say: in whatever we see that is made of earth, there are eight annas/parts [50%; or: the unaltered half] of the earth-element, two annas/parts [12.5%] of the water-element, two annas/parts [12.5%] of the fire-element, two annas/parts [12.5%] of the air-element, and two annas/parts [12.5%] of the space-element. Similarly, in water, there are eight annas/parts [50%] of the water element and two-annas/parts [12.5%] of each of the other four elements. It is the same with all of the other elements.
 
It is from these five great elements with their five operations that the physical body is born. For this reason, the microcosm and the macrocosm arise at the same time.
 
What the non-manifested five primal elements are and what the manifested five primal elements are in this process of emergence of the substances have now been explained. Now, how the physical, subtle and causal bodies are – that is being explained.
 
The body that is created (built) by the manifested/apparent version of the five great elements, arises from good and bad karmas, is the residence (place) of the experiences of pleasure and pain and such, and is that which [has the qualities of] “asti” (staying [temporarily]), “jayate” (being born), “vardhate” (growing), “viparinamate” (changing), “apaksheeyate” (deteriorating), [and] “vinashyati” (being destroyed) – endowed with these six mutations/modifications. That is verily the physical body.
 
The body that is created (built) by the non-manifested/non-apparent version of the five great elements arises from good and bad karmas, is the place of the process (causal activity) of experiences of pleasure and pain and such, and is endowed with the five organs of perception, the five organs of action, the five pranas, mind and intellect – these seven faculties. That is verily the subtle body.
 
And that which is the unutterable, beginning-less form of Avidya [primal non-knowing], the cause of the dual bodies of the physical and the subtle, that which veils the Knowledge of the Self-Itself, and is not conceptualized [or: unmodified] – that is verily the causal body.
 
Due to the operations of these three bodies, three states are experienced by the jiva [individual soul]. Those three states are: waking, dream and deep sleep. When, through the organs of perception, such as hearing etc., there is the awareness of the matters of sound and such – that is when there is the waking state. This is the activity of the physical body. The soul that has physical-body-vanity/physical-body-identification is actually “vishwa” [universe] itself; this type of statement is made.
 
Whatever is seen during the waking state, whatever is heard [during that state] – the “reality” that is experienced during sleep comes from the desires born of those [sensory experiences]. That is verily the state of dream. This is the activity of the subtle body. The soul that has subtle-body-vanity/subtle-body-identification is “taijas” [energy; light; power]; this type of statement is made.
 
“I do not know anything at all. I am happily enjoying sleep.” This is verily the state of deep sleep. This is the activity of the causal body. The soul that has causal-body-vanity/causal-body-identification is “praajna” [experiencer/knower]; this type of statement is made.
 
The five “koshas” [sheaths] of the body are thus: “annamaya,” “pranamaya,” “manomaya,” “vijnanamaya” and “anandamaya.” [See following paragraphs for the definitions and explanations of the names of the sheaths.]
 
That which arises from the food-essence, grows by the food-essence, and is disintegrated in the Earth, which is made of the food-essence – that is verily the “annamaya kosha” [food-filled sheath] – meaning: the physical body.
 
That which is called the “pranamaya kosha” [prana-filled sheath] is that which has the five vayus [vital-airs] such as “prana” etc., and the five organs of action such as speech/mouth etc. That which is called “manomaya kosha” [mind-filled sheath] is that which has the five organs of perception connected to the mind. Similarly, that which is called the “vijnanamaya kosha” [intellect-filled sheath] is that which has the five organs of perceptions connected to the intellect. These three sheaths exist and operate in the subtle body.
 
And thus, the impure primary substance that exists and operates within the causal body, which is situated in Avidya [primal non-knowing], and is endowed with vrittis [functionalities] such as dearness etc. – that is verily the “anandamaya kosha” [bliss-filled sheath].
 
So go the five sheaths. My body, my prana/s, my mind, my intellect, my knowingness – all of these are known by oneself automatically. And in that way, in the worldly abode of senses, it is “my” sound that happens; the “I” Itself does not sound; instead, all of that [which happens] is known to be separate from “I”. Similarly, in the five sheaths too – it is my sound that happens [in all of the sheaths]. All of these [happenings] are not “I” or the Self. So then how is the Self? Oh but like this: “sacchinAndaroopah” [Existence, Knowingness, Bliss] – meaning: the Self. “Sat” [that which is] = the One Who Is – [and is] in all three aspects of time [past, present, future]; “Chit” = Awareness/Knowingness Itself; and “Ananda” [Bliss] = Happiness Itself. This Self Who is Sacchidanda [or: Satchitananda] Itself is the One Who is the Knower of the field[s].