#### Prose 

कृषिगौरक्ष्यवाणिज्यं वैश्यकर्म स्वभावजम् |
परिचर्यात्मकं कर्म शूद्रस्यापि स्वभावजम् || 44||
kṛiṣhi-gau-rakṣhya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśhya-karma svabhāva-jam
paricharyātmakaṁ karma śhūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam

 #### Bengali Translation 

Farming, cattle raising, trade – these are the natural duties of vaishyas. Actions that are of the service-type are the natural duties of the shudra.

 #### Commentary 

To do “karshan” [plowing] to the field is called “krishi” [farming]. Plowing the field – in the form of this body – with inhalation and exhalation (according to guru’s teaching) in the directed way brings forth good harvest. “Gorakshya” [ordinary meaning: cattle raising; deeper meaning follows] = the word “go” means the Earth/earth – meaning: this whole body. To keep in mind the delusion of protecting and taking care of this [body] (but it can never be protected from its transience) – keeping the senses under the control of a mind that is on a good path is “gorakshya” [maintaining and protecting the body]. “Vanijya” [trade] – keeping profit for oneself and keeping something and giving something. The sadhak who has the samskara-born habit of doing Kriya with this type of desire for results – that is the one who is vaishya. Even so, this one is “dvija” [twice born; initiated] (Chapter 17, sloka 14 [of the Bhagavad Gita]). By continuously practicing Kriya, this one will go gradually higher and higher by this alone, and attain Emancipation.

And the one who is deeply attached to spouse and child, does not want to do Kriya, is afraid, cannot do, yet whose heart always wants to serve those three types of sadhaks – that is the one who is called shudra. These good-hearted ones, upon continuously doing those kinds of service, and going on continuously hearing the discourses on the spiritual knowledge of the Self from being in the company of the sadhaks [sages], attain the Supreme Blessing.