#### Prose 

न वेदयज्ञाध्ययनैर्न दानै-
र्न च क्रियाभिर्न तपोभिरुग्रै: |
एवंरूप: शक्य अहं नृलोके
द्रष्टुं त्वदन्येन कुरुप्रवीर || 48||
na veda-yajñādhyayanair na dānair
na cha kriyābhir na tapobhir ugraiḥ
evaṁ-rūpaḥ śhakya ahaṁ nṛi-loke
draṣhṭuṁ tvad anyena kuru-pravīra

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kurupraveera [Kuru hero; Arjuna]! Not by Vedic sacrifice nor [Vedic] study, not by charity, not by any Kriya[s], and not by intense austerities is anyone capable of seeing this Form in this human-world other than you. 

 #### Commentary 

“Na vedaih” [not by the Vedas] – (the root “vid” means “knowledge”) – if one comes to the state of “Jnana” [Supreme Knowledge], this [cosmic event] cannot be seen, because at that time there is no existence of seen and seer. “Na yajnaih” [not by sacrificial fire] – for as long as there is taking and giving – for that long – meaning: if the functionality of giving and taking are there, this [cosmic experience] does not happen. “Na adhyayanaih” [not by study] – as long as there is the work of gathering up the intellect from its being spread about in sound, touch, sight, taste and smell, and returning it to its own place – for that long this cannot be seen. “Na dAnaih” [not by charity] – when the activity of letting go remains, even as a renunciate, this does not happen. “Na kriyAbhih” [not by Kriya] – for as long as one is able to drive prana according to guru’s instructions – even in that activity, this vision does not appear. “Na tapobhirugraih” [not by intense austerities] – for as long as there is this triune state of sweat, shaking and movement during the practice of Kriya, this bit does not happen. This Form of the Self reveals Itself to the sadhak right at the still point before the “I” merges into “I”. O Kuru hero, there is no second road leading to this.