#### Prose 

न हि ज्ञानेन सदृशं पवित्रमिह विद्यते |
तत्स्वयं योगसंसिद्ध: कालेनात्मनि विन्दति || 38||
na hi jñānena sadṛiśhaṁ pavitramiha vidyate
tatsvayaṁ yogasansiddhaḥ kālenātmani vindati

 #### Bengali Translation 

Amongst tapoyoga and such, there is absolutely nothing that is as purifying as gyana. When fitness is attained in the performance of [spiritual] yoga, in time, the sadhak attains that gyana on his/her own.

 #### Commentary 

The essence/foundation is only gyana [Awareness]; Consciousness is Its Nature. Thus, It is the Revelation of the True Form of Brahman. When there are mutations in the Revelation, the universe or the twenty-four elements arise. For this reason, unlike the universe, only gyana is Pure! It is true that the chitta is purified through tapo-yagya [austere practices] and such. But if gyana-yagya is not performed, one cannot be a knower of Brahman. One cannot become a United Soul. That is why gyana is Pure. But that does not mean that gyana opposes karma [action]. Without attaining perfection in karmayoga [yogic act], one cannot have the right to have gyanayoga. Through karmayoga, when one settles in Kutastha in a still, steady state devoid of the tendency to be thrown out into the worldly experience, then such a time comes — Begin Footnote. — For as long as mind is within the five elements, for that long is time a resisting force. It covers up Awareness, or tries to do so. During this period, time is “Mahat” (see the second sloka from before [4:2]). As soon as mind goes above the five elements, then time is no more a resisting force. Then time is subtle. During this period, one does not have to do sadhana, time itself reveals gyana [Awareness]. It was from observing these two states that the terms “time's opposition” and “time's beneficence” came to be used in earlier times. — End Footnote. — (the influence of time is now in such a way) that there is no more exertion that remains; one does not have to make any effort. The mind automatically falls to the pull of gyana [Awareness]; the mind's seed of volition gets destroyed and “Purna gyana” Total Awareness dawns.