#### Prose 

तत: श्वेतैर्हयैर्युक्ते महति स्यन्दने स्थितौ |
माधव: पाण्डवश्चैव दिव्यौ शङ्खौ प्रदध्मतु: || 14||
tataḥ śhvetairhayairyukte mahati syandane sthitau
mādhavaḥ pāṇḍavaśhchaiva divyau śhaṅkhau pradadhmatuḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

After that, “Madhava” (Sri Krishna) and Pandava (Arjuna), seated in a great chariot pulled by four white horses, sounded two celestial conch-shells.

 #### Commentary 

Even though the sadhak has to come down due to the vrittis [movements in consciousness] of desires (pravritti), the vrittis directed to the Self (nivritti) rise in the heart/mind and again have [the sadhak] turn upwards. Then [the sadhak] gathers in his outward-directed tendencies, enters within and becomes locked in a location quite high up. That is what is called the “mahati syandana” or the high chariot. At that time, [the sadhak] can see a white light, which, right away seems to break up into four pieces and moves to the right, left, upwards and downwards – like lightning. Those are the “white horses.” After that light, [the sadhak] sees (in the heart) an indivisible spherical substance that is deep and dark. That is verily “Madhava” [“Ma” = Lakshmi – the Great Shakti with sattva guna (revelatory light) + “dhava” = husband (Krishna); the meaning is: the Being in Whose lap the Great Space is being revealed – it is He Who is “Madhava.”].8 Finally, after this dark sphere, a very bright, [yet] deeply dark bindu [spot] is seen. That bindu is “Pandava” (Arjuna). Going on looking at that, the mind becomes still, immediately upon which a sky-pervading sound comes forth. How that sound is, and the kind of a place from which it arises – that is being explained in the next group of slokas.