#### Prose 

ज्ञानेन तु तदज्ञानं येषां नाशितमात्मन: |
तेषामादित्यवज्ज्ञानं प्रकाशयति तत्परम् || 16||
jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ yeṣhāṁ nāśhitam ātmanaḥ
teṣhām āditya-vaj jñānaṁ prakāśhayati tat param

 #### Bengali Translation 

But, for those for whom that agyana [see sloka 5:15] is destroyed through the Knowledge of the Self, that Knowledge of the Self shines forth like the sun being revealed (revealing oneself and revealing others), and thus reveals the Supreme Truth.

 #### Commentary 

After that all-extinguishing state (samadhi) breaks and one comes down to the state of “prabhu” [see sloka 5:15] – the Knowledge of the Self that manifests at that time – that is brilliantly luminous like the sun. In that, knowledge and that which is to be known, and every atom and particle of the universe in the form of this body are directly known. The past and the future are revealed as if they are in the present. — Begin Footnote. — In the 6th sloka, by saying “sannyas does not happen without yoga,” the Lord showed that only after becoming yoga-united can one quickly go beyond all substances and attain Brahman. And, because the body has not yet expelled its very last breath – when, for natural reasons, the sadhak comes down to the realm of substances, then the sadhak becomes “tattvavit” [knower of truths] (in sloka 8). [At this time] the fives states – being yoga-united, purified in oneself, victorious over oneself, victorious over the senses, and seeing all phenomena/beings within the Self – come together in the sadhak all at the same time. But at the time of ascending in sadhana, these five states manifest separately and one after the other. After explaining the fruits of yoga in a simple way in slokas 6 and 7, in order to explain to Arjuna (to the sadhak) all of those [matters] in a more explicit way, the Lord spoke about the methodology and the types of the steps of ascension in slokas 10 and 11. And in slokas 12 to 15, He described those [aforementioned] five states separately. Thus, the “tattvavit” [knower of Truth] state of sloka 8 is the same as the state described in this sloka 16. It is in this state that the sadhak is Ishvara [God]! However, the difference between the sadhak's “god-ness” and the Lord of the universe's “God-ness” is this: the sadhak is the god of this microcosm; the Lord of the Universe is the God of the macrocosm. The five-element-created external universe does not get resolved with the attainment of union with the Supreme by the sadhak; that [universe] remains within the existence of the five elements. But when the resolution is done by the Lord of the Universe, everything is resolved. — End Footnote. —