#### Prose 

न हि कश्चित्क्षणमपि जातु तिष्ठत्यकर्मकृत् |
कार्यते ह्यवश: कर्म सर्व: प्रकृतिजैर्गुणै: || 5||
na hi kaśhchit kṣhaṇam api jātu tiṣhṭhatyakarma-kṛit
kāryate hyavaśhaḥ karma sarvaḥ prakṛiti-jair guṇaiḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

No one can stay still even for a moment without acting, because the three gunas of Prakriti have everyone/everything under their power and they make a person act.

 #### Commentary 

“Karma” [action] is nothing but the activity of prana. Whether wise or ignorant, all are bound to this movement of prana. Without the pranic activity taking place (“ajapajapa” [sacred repetition happening automatically, i.e. inhalation and exhalation]), absolutely no one can continue to be even for a short while. This activity does not stop even when one is asleep. As well, no one can say “I will not do it” and just be like that. This is because: everyone has fallen into the trap of sattva, rajas, and tamas – these three gunas [universal operative qualities] – and being under their power, everyone has to do “karma” [act]. In sattva-guna, the breath moves in the sushumna, and in rajas and tamas, the breath moves in ida and pingala. For as long as there will be the activity of the three gunas, for that long will the breath also move about in these [aforementioned] ways. Without being wrapped up in the Brahman-mantra and doing prana-Kriya according to the instructions of guru and going beyond the three gunas, the renunciation of karma does not happen. Therefore, the real sannyas [true renunciation] also does not happen.