#### Prose 

न बुद्धिभेदं जनयेदज्ञानां कर्मसङ्गिनाम् |
जोषयेत्सर्वकर्माणि विद्वान्युक्त: समाचरन् || 26||
na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām
joṣhayet sarva-karmāṇi vidvān yuktaḥ samācharan

 #### Bengali Translation 

The wise persons do not bring about discernment by intellect in the ignorant people who are attached to acts [for pleasures]. They [the wise] become unified (themselves), take up all kinds of actions and engage (them in acts).

 #### Commentary 

— Begin Footnote. — This is the usual translation of this sloka [3:26] [meaning: the Bengali translation above]. But  - in this sloka – by what type of performance of karma [spiritual act] the sadhak will be able to have discernment of intellect – because this teaching is there [in this sloka], what happens when one is attached to actions [for the attainment of pleasure] and what happens if one is unified (unattached) – only this has been shown [in the commentary section]. How the sadhak is supposed to move forward him/herself – the teaching of that is what is necessary. How the sadhak is supposed to affect the others – that teaching is not necessary. Thus, by keeping the subject matter pertaining to Kriya, this kind of explanation to the meaning of this sloka is presented here: that discernment by intellect does not come about for the ignorant who are attached to the karmas [rites and acts for the attainment of pleasure]. For this reason, the wise should become unified (unattached) and, engage in all karmas in a disciplined way. — End Footnote. — If one is able to attain attentiveness exactly in the center of Kutastha (in the middle), a hole will be seen. That is called the “bhramari guha.” The mouth of that “guha” [cave] is luminous and dark, but it is surrounded on all sides by radiant rays of light, and it [the cave] is protected by the two Mahashaktis [great powers] of “veiling” and “throwing out.” If sight is placed there, one gets thrown out. Otherwise, it [sight] gets covered up, like a curtain covering something up. Brahmacharya [celibacy; or: self-control], sattvic diet, sattvic behavior, the abandoning of cravings to enjoy worldly life, steady and patient persevering, and prana-Kriya – through the practice of these, peaceful energy grows in the body, and then the seeing power that pierces through the space in the middle of the eyebrows [internally] is born. That [sight] is never again covered up or thrown out by those powers of veiling and throwing out. Then, if one looks into the mouth of the cave, the mouth of the cave expands open and one is able to see within [that mouth]. One gets to know the matters of spirituality. That is why there is the scriptural saying: “dharmasya tattvaṃ nihitaṃ guhAyaṃ” [the knowledge of spirituality is hidden in the cave]. Now, cutting through the [dual powers of] veiling and throwing out is that which is known as the “discernment by intellect.” — Begin Footnote. — “Buddhiyukta” [union by intellect] as written in Chapter 2, sloka 50, and “buddhibheda” [discernment by intellect [stated in this sloka 3:26]] are operatively the same thing! — End Footnote. — This is because upon going above the level of the intellect, when the intellect becomes still, that [experience] happens. This discernment by intellect does not happen for the ignorant or those who are attached to karmas [rites and acts for gaining pleasures]. This is because: for one, the person is ignorant, and then on top of that there is attachment, both of which cause such a great attraction to the worldly experience that one cannot even get near that cave; far be it to talk about overcoming the rejection [throwing out]. For this reason, the wise become unified – meaning: abandon attachments, and keep steady attention on Kutastha, and thereupon taking up all karmas, become engaged [in spiritual practice]. When that happens, discernment by intellect will take place. Earth, water, fire, air, ether – these are the things that are known as “all.” In exhalation and inhalation, the individual “thokkar[s]” [strikes] of prana that one has to make in all of them [in the elements] – those are the individual karmas [rites]. That karma has to be done by being in the brahmanadi; one should not go into contact with the chakras. It is by [doing] this that the “taking up” of all [karmas] takes place. When, via the offering of prana, the powers of each chakra awaken, and beautiful Light appears within, then one has to take the prana-Kriya from each chakra, make them as one, establish it in the center – the middle of the eyebrows,*26 and apply Shambhavi. This is that which is referred to as the “taking up of all karmas in a disciplined way and becoming engaged.” Taking the prana-Karma up above in this way and being stationed in the Agya, the mind and prana become one. Thus, the mind does not come down any more. It stays locked with its attention on Kutastha. Then the inner sky becomes filled with thousand-fold Light — Begin Footnote. — That also happens in Yoni-mudra, but that does not last. However, it is first through the practice of Yoni-mudra that the vision of that path comes to be experienced. — End Footnote. —; one sees the bhramari [guha], [which was previously] covering its beauty. Its dual powers of veiling and throwing out automatically become powerless. And it is through the destruction of that veiling and throwing out that the knowledge of spiritual matters become directly known.