#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
पार्थ नैवेह नामुत्र विनाशस्तस्य विद्यते |
न हि कल्याणकृत्कश्चिद्दुर्गतिं तात गच्छति || 40||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
pārtha naiveha nāmutra vināśhas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyāṇa-kṛit kaśhchid durgatiṁ tāta gachchhati

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said: “O Partha [Arjuna]! Neither in this world nor in the afterworld is there any destruction for that/those sage/s. Therefore, O Taat [My son; Arjuna]! No one who is benevolent ever falls to a destiny of misfortune.”

 #### Commentary 

If the yogi is undisciplined, yet remains aware of  Reality, or even if the yogi has fallen from yoga [due to psychic delusion], even then he/she has no destruction ever again, not only in this world, not even in the afterworld. This is because: one who performs works of beneficence – meaning: in order to attain the Establishment in the Self, or the Settledness in Brahman, performs the Kriya that is the means to purify the chitta [personal consciousness] – that being never again has misfortune. There is no destruction [for the yogi] in this world. The reason is: once the Indivisible Sphere-like Guru is witnessed, because the awareness of Reality has arisen, that yogi never again forgets it. Thus, even if one is not disciplined enough in Kriyayoga, because the witnessing of the Guru gives birth to the spiritual tendencies, no types of ideas of doing bad things come into play. There is no destruction [for the yogi] in the afterworld either. Because of the same spiritual tendencies being active, one does not get a low birth. (See the following two slokas.) [The father spreads the sense of “I” through the offspring; for this reason he is “taat” [giver]. But the father also calls the son “taat” [dear son]. The guru, as well, through initiation, gives the second birth to the disciple and makes him/her a “dvija” [twice-born], and thus spreads the Knowledge of the Self. Therefore, the disciple is similar to a son/daughter. That is why the Lord is affectionately addressing Arjuna as “Taat” [my son].]