#### Prose 

आत्मौपम्येन सर्वत्र समं पश्यति योऽर्जुन |
सुखं वा यदि वा दु:खं स योगी परमो मत: || 32||
ātmaupamyena sarvatra samaṁ paśhyati yo ’rjuna
sukhaṁ vā yadi vā duḥkhaṁ sa yogī paramo mataḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Arjuna! The one who, viewing from the perception of the Self, sees pleasure or pain as the same with the same vision in everything and everywhere – in My view, that one is the supreme yogi.

 #### Commentary 

The yogis experience two states as the result of sadhana: one is “the state of being the Self,” and another is “the state of being the jiva [individual soul].” When they [the yogis] leave behind the external worldly experience and travel within, that time is their “state of being the Self.” And when they are in the external worldly experience, that time is when they are in “the state of being the jiva.” In the state of being the Self, there is the Knowledge of all, and thus, there is the unchanging, state of equipoise/equilibrium that is attained. The steady current of Bliss goes on flowing. And even if there is contact with the worldly experience – the kinds of vrittis [active principles] that normally rise in the mind and cause the experiences of pleasure and pain – that kind of thing does not happen any more. After coming down from this state of being the Self to the state of being the jiva and thereby contacting the worldly experience, in the beginning, as it is said: “sangAt sanjAyate kAmah” [along with contact, there is the creation of desire] – the vrittis of the worldly experience arise. But when practice is perfected and the inner and the outer become the same, then, even when there is the company of the worldly experience during the state of being the jiva, the vrittis [active principles] of the worldly experience do not arise; instead, the equipoise of the same Bliss of the Self goes on flowing in the antahkarana [personal consciousness]. Pleasure and pain are known as the same; there is no other way to see things outside of the Enjoyment of Consciousness. Therefore, [pleasure and pain] take on the same form. Making the external experience the same as the state of being the Self is the ultimate result of sadhana. The one who comes to this state – that one is indeed the supreme yogi. The Lord has spoken about the signs of the Knower of Brahman (the “jivanmukta” [one who is alive while living in the body]) in slokas 29, 30 and 31 [of this Chapter 6]. And, particularly through the words “sarvathA vartamAno'pi” [present [in Me] in whatever condition] etc., He has shown that the yogi no longer has restrictions of rules. Thus, even if that yogi's behavior and character appear to be like someone who is an ignorant samsari – even that is not of a wrongful nature. But, what is that yogi's state of mind like? To show that, the Lord, in sloka 32 [of this Chapter 6], has said that such a yogi's inner and outer being are the same. As that yogi is unchanging within – that yogi is the same even when he/she comes outside. The waves of pleasure and pain do not rise up in that yogi's mind. Pertaining to this very state, the sage Ashtavakra has written: “hantAmagyasya dheerasya khelato na hi saṃsAravAheekairmoodhaih saha samAnata yat padaṃ prapsyavo deenAh shakrAdyAh sarvadevatah ahoh! tatra sthito yogee na harShamupagacchati” [Bengali translation of the above quotation – as in the original] “Even if the wise person of Self-Knowledge goes about sporting in the Grand Sport of Enjoyments, there is no similarity at all between that being and the ignorant person who abides by samsaric ways. Lo! The state for which even the demi-gods such as Shakra etc. yearn – the yogi, even having attained and abiding in settledness in that very state, does not become excited [remains in equipoise].”