#### Prose 

एतद्योनीनि भूतानि सर्वाणीत्युपधारय |
अहं कृत्स्नस्य जगत: प्रभव: प्रलयस्तथा || 6||
etad-yonīni bhūtāni sarvāṇītyupadhāraya
ahaṁ kṛitsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

 #### Bengali Translation 

Know that all things come forth from these two prakritis. Therefore, I Myself am the cause of all creation and all dissolution (creation and destruction).

 #### Commentary 

The two powers of the Supreme Lord, known as apara and Para, representing the form-bound and Consciousness-oriented aspects, respectively, these that are being now experienced directly in the Knowledge of the Self – all manifestation comes forth from these two. The multifarious mixing of these two prakritis creates the many living beings. Like the way water changes into masses and masses of bubbles due to the force of the wind striking the water and the water taking on the covering of the wind, in the same way, the Consciousness-Prakriti takes on the covering of the form-bound prakriti and becomes the many kinds of living forms. The form-bound prakriti changes into body-forms, and the Consciousness-Prakriti enters the bodies as the experiencer, and through Its own actions carries on the body. Thus, these two prakritis are the “yoni” [womb] or “cause” of all phenomena. However, the cause of the prakritis themselves is the Supreme Lord. Therefore, the Supreme Lord is actually the cause of all creation. It is He Who is the Source of all powers. It is from Him that the world has come about. Thus, He is the One Who “is the dawning of the world.” It is in Him that the creation dissolves (takes rest). Therefore, He is the One Who “is the end of the world.”