#### Prose 

यदा ते मोहकलिलं बुद्धिर्व्यतितरिष्यति |
तदा गन्तासि निर्वेदं श्रोतव्यस्य श्रुतस्य च || 52||
yadā te moha-kalilaṁ buddhir vyatitariṣhyati
tadā gantāsi nirvedaṁ śhrotavyasya śhrutasya cha

 #### Bengali Translation 

When your intellect goes through the [seemingly] impenetrable fort of delusion, then you will become “nirveda” (devoid of pain) about that which is to be heard and that which has been heard.

 #### Commentary 

When intellect becomes certain/fixed [in the Self], all confusion dissolves; no delusion remains any longer. One no longer has to be deceived by the veils of sound and touch and such [senses]. Then, that which is to be heard — Begin Footnote. — In the path of laya [dissolution], only the Sound remains at the end. No things relating to the passage of time remain at all. That is why time has been spoken about [in sloka 52] using the reference of “shrutijnana” [knowledge of sound]. — End Footnote. — – meaning: the future – and that which has been heard – meaning:  the past – the awareness (pain) of these two no longer remain. Only the present remains – meaning: because of the Sound becoming unbroken, as well as being unstruck, it cannot be found to have any beginning or end. As the torrent [of sense-experience] ends, there is no before and after. Everything becomes the present. Then the current of time comes to an end and the sadhak him/herself becomes transformed into Time itself. Therefore, he/she no longer has any separation of past and future. The sadhak becomes transformed into the Changeless True Substance and becomes the Eternal Present. — Begin Footnote. — Who am I, by what has this “I” or this feeling [of “I”] happened
What is the past “I”, this visible body, what will I be, what my birth was in the past
The word “I” means One, and even more, all is unified
The dual aspect of time, future and past, has been erased by this “I”
 — End Footnote. — When the “I” of the jiva is dissolved into the Great “I”, there is no existence of “two” next to the existence of the One. Therefore, no ascertaining and understanding remain either. A state free of the knowledge of all matters comes into being.