#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
संन्यास: कर्मयोगश्च नि:श्रेयसकरावुभौ |
तयोस्तु कर्मसंन्यासात्कर्मयोगो विशिष्यते || 2||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
sannyāsaḥ karma-yogaśh cha niḥśhreyasa-karāvubhau
tayos tu karma-sannyāsāt karma-yogo viśhiṣhyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said, “'Sannyas' [renunciation] and 'karmayoga' [spiritual act/practice] are both givers of Liberation. However, among these, karmayoga is superior. 

 #### Commentary 

It was said in Chapter 4, sloka 41 that gyana [Knowing] and karmasannyas [the ending of acts] are greatest, and again in this sloka it is being said that karmayoga [spiritual act] is superior. This seeming discrepancy is due to the differences in the rights [of the practitioners]. Karma [spiritual act] and sannyas [the ending of acts] are the two ends of the stairway of sadhana. Karma is of the lower, sannyas is of the upper. The one who is below – in order to go up, [that] one has to first take up karma [yogic practice]. Only then can one get sannyas. It is not possible to have sannyas without karma [spiritual act]. That is why karma is greater. And then again, one who has gone above and has taken sannyas – because that being does not have any need for karma, for that person sannyas is greatest. The sum of it is this: sannyas only happens after karma is taken up. And if sannyas happens, Liberation happens. That is why it has been said both are “nihshreyaskara” [neither are greater than the other; see end of first line of the sloka above] – meaning: [both] bestow Liberation. 