#### Prose 

व्यामिश्रेणेव वाक्येन बुद्धिं मोहयसीव मे |
तदेकं वद निश्चित्य येन श्रेयोऽहमाप्नुयाम् ||
vyāmiśhreṇeva vākyena buddhiṁ mohayasīva me
tad ekaṁ vada niśhchitya yena śhreyo ’ham āpnuyām

 #### Bengali Translation 

It is as if You are trying to bewilder my intellect with these confusing words. That by which I will attain the great – tell me something about that with clarity and certainty.

 #### Commentary 

The sadhak (Arjuna), upon learning about the difference between “sankhya buddhi” (gyana-yoga) and “yoga-buddhi” (karma-yoga) – these two – in the previous chapter [Chapter 2], and upon understanding about the establishment in Brahman according to the teachings of Sankhya, had become eager to attain that [establishment in Brahman]. And the sadhak concluded that compared to the establishment in Brahman, the act is an intense distress. But the Lord, through the statement “dharmyaddhi yuddhAcchreyo'nyat kshatriyasya na vidyate” [there is nothing greater for a Kshatriya [warrior] than the opportunity to fight a righteous war] (Chapter 2, sloka 31 [of the Gita]), explained that there is nothing greater for the Kshatriya than the dutiful battle (karma [yogic act]). In this [statement], it is indeed the act that is being praised. And again, by this statement, “durena hyavaraṃ karma buddhiyogat dhananjaya” [action is far inferior to buddhiyoga [yoga of knowledge], Dhananjaya [Arjuna]] (Chapter 2, sloka 49), He is also saying that buddhi [intellect] (gyana [knowledge]) is superior to karma [action]. In this [statement], it is  indeed the intellect that is being praised. Thus, having become desirous to attain the establishment in Brahman through the practice of yoga through intellect, and upon hearing the Lord praise action at one time and the intellect at another time, doubt arrived in the mind of the sadhak; the intellect also became bewildered. Which one is better? Is it better to take recourse in the wisdom of yoga, or is it better to take recourse in the wisdom of Sankhya? The sadhak is not able to become clear and certain about this. That is why the sadhak asks Guru-Brahman Kutastha Who is within, “Amongst karma [act] and buddhi (gyana) which is the best (giver of Liberation)?” The sadhak is desiring that this be clear and certain.