#### Prose 

ज्योतिषामपि तज्ज्योतिस्तमस: परमुच्यते |
ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं ज्ञानगम्यं हृदि सर्वस्य विष्ठितम् || 18||
jyotiṣhām api taj jyotis tamasaḥ param uchyate
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ hṛidi sarvasya viṣhṭhitam

 #### Bengali Translation 

That is the light of all lights such as the sun etc. (revealer). And it is said to be beyond tamah [darkness] (meaning: untouched by ignorance). (That is that which is) knowledge, the object of knowledge, that which is to be attained through knowledge and is seated (in the hearts) of all living beings as the controller.

 #### Commentary 

“Jyotish” means the moon, sun and fire [and such light-emitting/light-reflecting substances], those whose light removes the darkness perceived by the physical eyes and allows one to see properly. And another “jyotish” is “jyotish-vidya” [astrology], by which, through its mathematical analyses, the projected resolutions of things can be known. And “jyotish” [is also], self-understanding (like: I used to play during childhood; now I am in old age; that place is no more; that time is no more; that participant is also not there; yet I am seeing them in memory as if they are happening now; like that) – that which shows in the future as if it is in the present. These few types of “jyotish” are contents of the aforementioned “Tat.” Therefore, “Tat” is light of even the revealers. This “Tat” is ever-existent on the other side of [is beyond] darkness. This “Tat” is right after the final state of “knowledge” [as stated in slokas 13:8-12]. The object to be known is also this “Tat.” Through knowledge, one has to fall into this “Tat” and take up Eternal Peace. That which is meant by the word “sarva” [all], within its heart – meaning: [“Tat” is] within it, and because It is Boundless, It is also outside that “sarva” – the “Tat” is there in its Fullness. “Sarva” is in the abyss of “Tat,” like the way the Earth is in the abyss of space. 