#### Prose 

तस्मात्सर्वेषु कालेषु मामनुस्मर युध्य च |
मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्मामेवैष्यस्यसंशयम् || 7||
tasmāt sarveṣhu kāleṣhu mām anusmara yudhya cha
mayyarpita-mano-buddhir mām evaiṣhyasyasanśhayam

 #### Bengali Translation 

Therefore, remember me “sarvakaale” [ordinary meaning: at all times; see commentary below for meaning particular to sadhana] and do battle. If your mind and intellect are surrendered to Me, you will, without any doubt, attain Me.

 #### Commentary 

[The Lord is saying:] “That is why I am saying that “sarvakaale” – meaning: at “sarvadaa” [see commentary to sloka 6:15 of the Pranab Gita] (at the period of time from 9 pm at night to 4 am in the morning), while continuously meditating upon My “anu” [minutest particle; or: essence] (Pranava), do battle (Kriya of pranayam and such). Battling means striking. To strike, one has to first lift something and then throw it. So, when you expel the breath (arrow) and lift it back up, then – through the guru-instructed Kriya – do this type of “yojana” [concentrated practice]: earth to water, water to fire, fire to air, air to space, space to the five senses, senses to the tanmatras [source of the senses], tanmatras to the ego, ego to Mahat-tattva, and Mahat-tattva to the jiva. This type of “yojana” is that which is called “bhutashuddhi” [the purification of the person]. Upon having done this “bhutashuddhi,” become established in the True Self and cast off even this adjunct of being a jiva [person]. When that happens, you will immediately become the conflict-free “I”. This is because: the “I” is just beyond the mind and intellect. When these two [mind and intellect] are thrown into Me, “I” happens.