#### Prose 

न कर्तृत्वं न कर्माणि लोकस्य सृजति प्रभु: |
न कर्मफलसंयोगं स्वभावस्तु प्रवर्तते || 14||
na kartṛitvaṁ na karmāṇi lokasya sṛijati prabhuḥ
na karma-phala-saṅyogaṁ svabhāvas tu pravartate

 #### Bengali Translation 

“Prabhu” [Lord] (“Ishvara” [God]) does not create the doership of the planes, does not create the actions, and does not create the connection of the fruits of actions either. All of this is carried out through [the Self's] “Svabhava” [Nature]. 

 #### Commentary 

After being “vashee” [see sloka 5:13], the sadhak rises up to the field of the chitta and becomes “prabhu” [lord] (truly still). At that time, only the vritti of contemplation is present, and because the sadhak is without ego, he/she becomes all-knowing! Among the 24 substances of Prakriti, this is the state of Supreme Primacy for Consciousness/Spirit; that is why He is “prabhu” (“Ishvara” [God])! At this time, the sadhak sees oneself and realizes that the sadhak is no longer under the power of Prakriti. Prakriti Herself is under the power of the sadhak. It is by taking recourse in the Self that Prakriti is playing Her Sport. All of the doership, actions, and the connection to the fruits of actions that take place in the fourteen planes — Begin Footnote. — The seven chakras from the Muladhar to the Sahasrar are indeed the seven heavens. And the tips of the big toes, the two ankles, the insteps [alternate translation: the shin area], the knees, the thighs and the pelvis are the seven patalas [underworlds]. The active properties of these can be known through the sadhana as instructed by guru.] — End Footnote. — such as “Satya[loka]” and such – the Self does not do them. It is simply the Witness. Prakriti is actually taking recourse in the Self and doing all of those things. This Prakriti is the Self's “Svabhava” – meaning: the Self's Own Nature or State. This “Svabhava” is of two types: free and controlled. For as long as the Consciousness-Spirit does not cross the field of “I,” for that long is that Svabhava free. Consciousness is controlled in Her Womb. It is in this state that Prakriti is the Mother; the jiva is the offspring. When that Consciousness-Truth is in the state of Ishvara [God], at that time the Svabhava is controlled; Consciousness is Lord over Her. It is in this state that Prakriti is the “Ramani” [Lover; Delighter] and Ishvara is “Swami” [Husband/Beloved; Lord]. When one can rise up to the “prabhu” state through the power of sadhana, the truth of the statement “janani ramani, ramani janani” [mother is the lover/delighter, lover/delighter is the mother] can be known. All powers of activities dissolve in the state of “prabhu.” Only the state “I am indeed 'I'” remains. Nothing else at all remains. This is the state of “jitendriya” [victorious over the senses] that is stated in the seventh sloka [of this Chapter 5]. 