#### Prose 

अवजानन्ति मां मूढा मानुषीं तनुमाश्रितम् |
परं भावमजानन्तो मम भूतमहेश्वरम् || 11||
avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣhīṁ tanum āśhritam
paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto mama bhūta-maheśhvaram

मोघाशा मोघकर्माणो मोघज्ञाना विचेतस: |
राक्षसीमासुरीं चैव प्रकृतिं मोहिनीं श्रिता: || 12||
moghāśhā mogha-karmāṇo mogha-jñānā vichetasaḥ
rākṣhasīm āsurīṁ chaiva prakṛitiṁ mohinīṁ śhritāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The deluded, the demonic and the fiend take refuge in Prakriti and thereafter take part in vain/empty hopes, vain/empty works and vain/empty knowledge. Not knowing My Supreme Being, the mentally dissipated ignorant ones clad in human form disrespect Me. 

 #### Commentary 

“Manush” [human] is said to be the being that has “mind.” The way of that mind is to have volition and non-volition. Those who are fully dedicated to the way of the mind – meaning: whether it is about doing something or not doing something, if that purpose is not fulfilled it feels like “I can’t live; I am totally ruined” – those that drown in this kind of blindness – they are the ones who are the slaves of the human body-mind. The one who has this kind of weakness in the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] – that is the one who is “moodha” [ignorant; stupid]. This is because that kind of person only lives for the fulfillment of the lusts of enjoyment. Otherwise that person “dies.” People with this kind of condition are of contracted consciousness/small minds. They do not understand that the “I” is the Beginning-less Infinity, the Lord of this phenomena-marketplace. Thus, they dress their own selves up as mini-Narayana [mini-God] and disrespect Me [the Self]. It is for this reason that there are hopes that end, works that do not sustain, and that is the cause of taking recourse in impermanent, torturous, demonic, fiendish and self-destroying ways.