#### Prose 

एवं प्रवर्तितं चक्रं नानुवर्तयतीह य: |
अघायुरिन्द्रियारामो मोघं पार्थ स जीवति || 16||
evaṁ pravartitaṁ chakraṁ nānuvartayatīha yaḥ
aghāyur indriyārāmo moghaṁ pārtha sa jīvati

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha [Arjuna]! One who does not do “anuvartan” [reversal of direction/cycle] of the chakras as they are manifested here in this way is “aghayu” [of short lifespan], “indriyaram” [delights in the senses] and lives a meaningless/useless/failed life.

 #### Commentary 

Now, these chakras that have manifested: first – Agya. Start Footnote. -- The Sahasrar is a field devoid of rajas [guna]. There is no activity in that place. There is only the Still Revelatory Light. At the start of creation – it is at the Agya that rajas first appears. That is why Agya is [mentioned as] the first [instead of second]. -- End Footnote.  second – Vishuddha, third – Anahata, fourth – Manipur, fifth – Svadhisthan and sixth – Muladhar – each of these have emerged from the one previous to it. Similarly, Consciousness has also come down, one by one, and at the very end, has taken on the garb of “bhoota” [living beings] upon coming to the Muladhar and coming out [to the external world]. In order for It to again reach/return to the True Substance, It has to take the very same road on which It came down – meaning: It has to first enter the Muladhar, go from there to the Svadhisthan, then from the Svadhisthan to the Manipur – in this way, It has to go to the Agya. This reversal of direction is called “anuvartan.” The one who does not do this “anuvartan,” that person is “aghayu” [of short lifespan] – meaning: that person's lifespan diminishes because of staying in the worldly experience with its torrents of restlessness. That person does not find rest and peace. That person is “indriyaram” [delights in the senses] – meaning: the impermanent delight that comes from sensory events – he/she experiences only that. Not having the Pristine Bliss of the Self, that person cannot become “Atma-Rama” [Delighter in the Self]. And that person is “moghaṃ jeevati” - meaning: carries on a meaningless/useless/failed life. This is because the worldly experience is impermanent. For this reason, whatever that person takes up, that very thing ends. Thus, after one [desired thing] ends, another one is taken up; after that ends, another one – in this way, that person has to run from one worldly experience to the ends of worldly experiences; he/she cannot find the Indestructible Bliss. Thus, that person stays in a contemptible life.