#### Prose 

नेहाभिक्रमनाशोऽस्ति प्रत्यवायो न विद्यते |
स्वल्पमप्यस्य धर्मस्य त्रायते महतो भयात् || 40||
nehābhikrama-nāśho ’sti pratyavāyo na vidyate
svalpam apyasya dharmasya trāyate mahato bhayāt

 #### Bengali Translation 

There is never any loss of “abhikrama” [progress] from the effort made in this karmayoga (no fruitlessness in endeavoring in it), nor is there any going backwards. Even a little bit of this dharma (if practiced) saves one from the Great Fear. 

 #### Commentary 

In this karmayoga, there is never any stopping of “abhikrama” [progress] (“abhi” = front; “krama” = to move) – meaning: there is no stopping of the movement in the direction of the Self. That is because this is a “tadarthiya” karma [act taken in order to attain the predetermined end – Liberation], and because of that there is no “abhav” [loss] in it. Similarly, there is no transgressing or backwards movement [in this yoga] either. That is because the yogi, even in the afterlife, automatically and irrespective of his/her own will, rises up in the direction of the Self because of the power attained through previous practice, as it is stated in sloka 44 of Chapter 6 [of the Gita]. Even a little bit of this dharma (the taking up of yoga) saves one from the Great Fear. The birth and death [and rebirth] is what is called the Great Fear. In the path of pravritti (viloma [see commentary on sloka 16 of this Chapter 2] or the path of samsara) – if one is simply on that path, it means that the attention will be on worldly things. But because of the impermanence of worldly things, it is unavoidable that one has to leave that worldly experience after the end of the period of enjoyment of whatever that worldly thing is. Therefore, death is a certainty. And just because there is death, there is again rebirth. This birth and death cycle goes on repeating. It does not end. But if one progresses even a little in the path of nivritti (anuloma [see commentary on sloka 16 of this Chapter 2] or the path of yoga), because of the absence of non-progress or transgression, the attention becomes magnetized to the Eternal. Thus, whether by breath or by body [see commentary on slokas 26 and 27 of this Chapter 2 regarding the two types of death], whatever kind of death that happens, after just a few births one can go beyond the birth-death torrent. “BahunAṃ janmanAmante jnAnvAn maṃ prapadyate” [after many births, those with Divine Knowledge attain/come unto Me] (Gita 7:19).