#### Prose 

गतसङ्गस्य मुक्तस्य ज्ञानावस्थितचेतस: |
यज्ञायाचरत: कर्म समग्रं प्रविलीयते || 23||
gata-saṅgasya muktasya jñānāvasthita-chetasaḥ
yajñāyācharataḥ karma samagraṁ pravilīyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

(The reason:) being without desire, being completely free of the conflicts of pleasure and pain and such, being established in the Knowledge of the Self, and doing work as a “yagya” [fire offering; see commentary below for reference to spiritual meaning] (for the sake of pleasing Vishnu) – the person of this character attains the dissolution of his/her mass of karma and its fruits. 

 #### Commentary 

The statement “krtVApi na nibaddhayate” [though performing actions, is not bound by them] that has been stated in the previous sloka [4:22] – that which is the reason behind that [state] is being explained in this sloka. See the commentary in Chapter 3, sloka 9 for the meaning of “yagya.” The universe-pervading Consciousness-Being Vishnu is verily “yajneshvara” [Lord of yagyas] (Self). Endeavoring to please Him – meaning: becoming One with Him is verily the happiness of oneself. Crossing the Agya-chakra and coming up above, the settled, steady Luminous State in the Consciousness of the Self that is attained – that is verily the happiness of oneself. The karma [act] that is performed in order to attain this happiness of oneself is, indeed, yagya. When karma [spiritual act] is performed, by following the teachings of guru and as an offering, one crosses the five elements which make up the ground of the rajoguna, and desire runs out – leaves one's company. Thus, being free of conflict, the heart rests in the knowingness at the Agya. For this reason, all karma [actions and their fruits] in their totality is dissolved. No bondage at all remains.