#### Prose 

कर्मणो ह्यपि बोद्धव्यं बोद्धव्यं च विकर्मण: |
अकर्मणश्च बोद्धव्यं गहना कर्मणो गति: || 17||
karmaṇo hyapi boddhavyaṁ boddhavyaṁ cha vikarmaṇaḥ
akarmaṇaśh cha boddhavyaṁ gahanā karmaṇo gatiḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

In order to understand “karma,” “vikarma” has to be understood, and “akarma” also has to be understood. This is because the way of karma is “gahana” (extremely difficult to know). 

 #### Commentary 

Karma is indeed the world. Karma is, verily, samsara. The way of karma is “gahana” [mysterious; difficult to know]. The One Who is “Parmeshvari” [Supreme Goddess], “Maheshvari-Shakti” [the creative power of the Lord of the Universe] — Begin Footnote. — “yA sA mAheshvaree shakti gyanaroopAti lAlasA vyoma saṃgya kalA kAShThA seyaṃ haimavatee matA” [That One Who is the Maheshvari Shakti [Goddess-Power of All] is Knowledge Itself, and is Endearment Itself. She is the Knower of the Ethereal, is the Supreme Science, and is known as “Haimavati” [Daughter of the Himalayas; Parvati; Devi].] — End Footnote. — or “Maya” - it She Who is “gahana.” That difficult-to-know, unapproachable Maya is the “gati” [destination; recourse] of karma – meaning: its abode or source. That is because it is Maya – in the form of karma – that is “Jagaddhatri” [holder of the world]. Just as Maya takes one thing and manifests in infinite ways and confuses the jiva in all of those new understandings [of those manifestations], like that, if karma is performed in the same way, it gives forth many different kinds of fruits in many different forms. To teach the sadhak the knowledge of how karma functions, Guru-Brahman Sri Bhagavan [Sri Krishna; the Lord] has divided karma according to its functions in three sections: (1) “karma,” (2) “vikarma,” and( 3) “akarma.” (1) “Karma”: “bhutabhAvodbhavakarah visargah karmasaṃjnitah,” [The following is a word by word explanation of  spiritual meaning of this Sanskrit statement.] “Bhuta” means “jiva” [living beings]; “bhAva” means “state.” Therefore, “bhutabhAva” means the state of jiva for the Consciousness/Spirit or the “bhAva” of “jiva.” And “ut” means “above” - meaning: above the five elements or at the Agya-chakra. And “bhava” [the middle “a” is short] means “being.” Thus, being established above is called “udbhava.” “Visarga” means “tyaga” [to get rid of], “nihshvasatyaga” [the relinquishing of the breath] or “pranatyaga” [the ending of prana; or: the ending of the life-force]. The “visarga” that is the cause of the “udbhava” [rising upward] of the state of jiva – meaning: the way of relinquishing the breath that causes the state of jiva to “udbhava” [rise upward], and establishes the state of jiva into the State of Shiva – it is that which is called “karma” [spiritual act]; meaning: the particular way of moving prana so that the jivatman [personal self] merges with the Paramatman [Supreme Self] – it is that which is called “karma” [yogic act]. (2) “Vikarma”: “vi” = opposing + “karma.” The karma because of which the jiva has to come to samsara – meaning: has to take on a body and come down into the worldly experience – that is called “vikarma.” These are the samskaras [active tendencies] from the previously created [or: carried out] karma. In the forms of “sanchita” [accumulated] and “prarabdha” [ripe karmas associated with having to take on the body], [“vikarma”] makes the jiva experience the fruits of these [types of karmas]. (3) “Akarma”: When karma is finished – meaning: when prana and apana merge and the vrittis are gone from memory, when the state of silence comes – that is indeed “akarma” (that which is not karma). [See Part 4 of the Introduction.] “I” and “mine,” or “Self” and “worldly experience” - the State when these two are One is “Brahman”; when these are Connected, the State is Shiva (Seeing/Knowing); and when these two are separated, the state is “jiva” (creation). — Begin Footnote. — An analogy can be given that relates to these three states. When rock-candy [sugar] is put to soak in water, for as long as the rock-candy is hard, for that long the water and the rock-candy are in a “separated” state. When the rock-candy has partially dissolved but is still in a congealed state in one area and has not yet made all of the water sweet – that is the “connected” state of the water and the rock-candy. When the water and the rock-candy becomes the same liquid, that is the “unified” state [or: the “oneness”] of the water and the rock-candy. — End Footnote. — The action by which the worldly experience manifests – that is “vikarma”; and the action by which the Self is revealed – that is “karma” [spiritual act]. To sum it up: the vrittis [functionalities] that are directed towards the worldly experience are “vikarma” and the vrittis that are directed towards the Self are “karma.” When, with the vrittis directed to the Self, the “mine” goes and merges with “I”, then – the vritti-less State of Stillness that comes about within the Consciousness of the Self – that is what is called “akarma” [non-karma] in the yogic scriptures. (See the next sloka.) 