#### Prose 

गामाविश्य च भूतानि धारयाम्यहमोजसा |
पुष्णामि चौषधी: सर्वा: सोमो भूत्वा रसात्मक: || 13||
gām āviśhya cha bhūtāni dhārayāmy aham ojasā
puṣhṇāmi chauṣhadhīḥ sarvāḥ somo bhūtvā rasātmakaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Through the power of “ojas” [pure essential energy] I enter earth, and hold all phenomena and living beings. And by being the essence-filled moon, I nourish all medicines/nourishers. 

 #### Commentary 

The subtle is sustaining the physical/gross. The more that one is sense-oriented, the more is that being physical/gross. Earth holds eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin – these five senses. Thus, earth is gross. Because water holds eyes, ears, tongue, skin – these four senses, it is subtler than earth. And again, fire holds eyes, ears, skin – these three senses. Therefore, fire is subtler than water. Similarly, because air holds ears and skin – these two senses, it is subtler than fire. And because space only holds ears, it is subtler than air. Mind is not the holder of any of the senses. For this reason, mind is subtler even than space. Intellect, ego and chitta [personal consciousness] are only changes in the states of mind. What can be understood by this is that mind is subtle, and the five elements such as space, etc., or anything that is of the five elements – all of that is physical/gross. This mind is that which is holding those five elements, because if there is no mind, they [the elements] also do not exist. That is why it is being said that the subtle is sustaining the physical/gross. Then again, compared to “I”, mind is physical/gross as well, because even without contacting the senses, the mind can be felt. But “I” cannot even be felt. (The one that goes to feel “I” – that one becomes “I”.) Therefore, it “I” Who Am the subtlest of the subtle. The subtler one is, the more is that one’s “ojas” [pure energy]. Water is ten times subtler than earth; therefore, the pervading power of water is ten times that of earth. Similarly, because no one/nothing is subtler than “I”, the pervading power of “I” is greater than all [others’ pervading power]. Thus, “I” am present inside and outside everything/everyone. When it is like this, it is called “holding.” Thus, “I” am holding everything/everyone as My own. Not only that – in the form of the all-essence-endowed “soma” (moon), “I” place the particles of My Essence in rice, barley, sesame, wheat and such medicines/nourishers (the things by which the jiva is saved from hunger and illness), and “I” am doing the nourishing as well. 