#### Prose 

सर्गाणामादिरन्तश्च मध्यं चैवाहमर्जुन |
अध्यात्मविद्या विद्यानां वाद: प्रवदतामहम् || 32||
sargāṇām ādir antaśh cha madhyaṁ chaivāham arjuna
adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ vādaḥ pravadatām aham

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Arjuna! It is I Who am the beginning, end and middle of creation. Among “vidya[s]” [knowledge[s]], I am “adhyatmavidya” [spiritual knowledge], and among “vaadi[s]” [logics; argumentations] ([meaning:] among “vaad” [mutual discussion]; “jalpa” [adversarial argument], “vitanda” [wrangling for the sake of winning alone]), “I am “vaad.”

 #### Commentary 

“Sarga” [creation; see first line of sloka above] means “levels” – meaning: that which has a beginning, middle and end. This cosmos is also endowed with a beginning, middle and end. O Arjuna! O sadhak! It is “I” Who have become the levels and am visible to you as this cosmos. When space is partitioned by a fence, it looks to the physical sight that space has been divided. Just as, in truth, space is not divided, and in that [apparent] partition’s beginning, middle and end there is no absence of the presence of space – in the same way, in Indivisible Brahman, even though the One “I” is divided into many via the imaginary powers of Maya’s partitions (even if, through Mayic eyes, the separation is visible), Brahman actually remains Undivided. That is why I am saying, “O sadhak! See it directly. All of the levels that exist (creation) within you from the earth-element to Maya – in their beginnings, middles and ends, “I” am there in Undivided Form. Your created levels, are like jewels strung on a thread, and even though you see it through your eyes as existing on Me – still, that is not true.”
 
AdhyAtmavidyA vidyAnAm [among knowledges, I am spiritual knowledge] – “vidya” (“vid” = knowing; and “y” + “a”) – that by which the knowledge of things can be known. Everything that there is in this creation – that is the “false.” And that which makes one think that that falseness is true – that is “Avidya” [non-knowledge; ignorance]. “Adhyatma vidya” [spiritual knowledge] is that which takes the intelligence and merges it into the Self. (See definition of “adhyatma” in Chapter 8, sloka 3 [of the Pranab Gita].)That is why I am saying that whatever types of knowledges there are – among them the Knowledge of the Self is “I”. Dear sadhak! See. When, after leaving everything and everyone from Earth, you fall into “I” and become “I”, everything else disappears, but that “I” does not go away. That which cannot be divided up by the three phases of time – that is that which is “nitya” [eternal]. That spiritual knowledge is also Eternal; thus, it is “I”.
 
VAdah pravadAmaham [among argumentations/logics, I am “vaad”] – “Pravadan” [argumentation[s]] means the blah blah blah between him, her, them. And the enquiry that happens after becoming devoid of questions, the enquiry to find Truth – that is that which is called “vaad” [proper enquiry; inner resonance]. Truth is nothing/no one but “I”. Thus, among “pravadan,” “I” am “vaada.”