#### Prose 

एतां दृष्टिमवष्टभ्य नष्टात्मानोऽल्पबुद्धय: |
प्रभवन्त्युग्रकर्माण: क्षयाय जगतोऽहिता: || 9||
etāṁ dṛiṣhṭim avaṣhṭabhya naṣhṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥ
prabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ kṣhayāya jagato ’hitāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Ruined/corrupted in their selves and being of small intelligence, and (those asura-natured people), as they have this kind of perspective (of doing cruel deeds and being enemies to the world), are born to destroy. 

 #### Commentary 

Those asura-natured people are “nashtatmaat” – meaning: being without sattva guna and being locked in the rajas-tamoguna, the Infinite, Non-diminishing Self does not get revealed in their personal consciousness. They are of corrupted character. Thus, there is “alpabuddhi” [little intelligence] in them. The thing that runs out because of experiencing it – that is “alpa” [little]. That which does not run out – that is “ananta” [endless]. In comparison to the Self, this body is little. Not being able to cognize “I am the Self,” they have the perspective of “the body is me,” and thus become ever engaged in the body’s pleasure and service. Because this “I am the body idea” is fully present in them, they are “of little intelligence.” They, being of this kind of “little intelligence,” think that this world has come about through the intercourse of female and male, that the cause [of the world] is only lust, that there is no other cause for it – taking up this kind of view – meaning: they go on to see the world through this kind of perception. Having fallen to this way of having corrupted character, little intelligence and lustfulness, they do not believe in the afterworld or in spiritual ways. Thus, they become engaged in many types of cruel and ruthless acts, and act to bring suffering to the world (to ordinary living beings). Thus, they are born for the destruction of the world. Death is the destruction of the world – meaning: they die again and again in life; they experience only the ever-appearing birth and death. They do not get delivered from this. (See slokas 19 and 20 later [in this Chapter 16 of the Pranab Gita].) 