#### Prose 

ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं परिज्ञाता त्रिविधा कर्मचोदना |
करणं कर्म कर्तेति त्रिविध: कर्मसंग्रह: || 18||
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā tri-vidhā karma-chodanā
karaṇaṁ karma karteti tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower – these are the threefold causalities for the taking of action. The instrument, act and the doer of the act – these are the three types of constituents of action – meaning: the recourse for the act. 

 #### Commentary 

It is like: a pot is an object. Its cause is the potter (the doer). Clay (the basis), kiln, wheel, stick etc. ([are] instruments). The using of hands and such actions ([are] efforts). And the ability of the potter to create a pot ([is] “daiva” [the unseen factor]). In order to produce the pot, these five are necessary. But if only these five are there, does the making of a pot happen? – meaning: even if clay, wheel, the potter and his/her physical ability and skills are there, if the pot is not [actually] made, then can there be a pot? If something makes one go into doing the work of producing a pot, only then can it happen, otherwise not. That is why it is being said: that if any work is to take place, these five causalities/factors and a desire/need to do the act has to be there. Who is that “desirer”? None but knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower. “I need such and such thing.” Here, that feeling of need is “knowledge.” The thing is “the object of knowledge.” And I am the “knower.” If that thing is not needed by/desired by me, would I make efforts for that? Thus, knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower – these are enjoined (bound) to action. And when some particular thing was determined to be something needed/desired by me, then through the operations of eyes, ears, hands and feet [and such], I got/made that thing. Here, those eyes ears and such are the instruments. The operations that are done comprise the act, and I am the doer. That is why it is being said that the instruments, the work, and the doer comprise the recourse for action – meaning: action is dependent upon these three.  