#### Prose 

अहं क्रतुरहं यज्ञ: स्वधाहमहमौषधम् |
मन्त्रोऽहमहमेवाज्यमहमग्निरहं हुतम् || 16||
ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ svadhāham aham auṣhadham
mantro ’ham aham evājyam aham agnir ahaṁ hutam

 #### Bengali Translation 

I am “kratu” [rite]; I am “yajna” [fire rite]; I am “svadha” [offering]; I am “aushadh” [medicine]; I am “mantra,” I am “ajya” [ghee], I am “agni” [fire]; I am “hutam” [the pouring out of the oblation].

 #### Commentary 

“Dvaita” means “two.” And “advaita” means “one.” I Am without this dvaita-advaita [duality and non-duality]. Now sadhak! See, you do not have duality nor non-duality. That is because you have become “I”. Whatever there is in the fourteen planes – all of it is “I”.
 
What I am [follows]:
Ahaṃ kratu [I am the rite]. “Kratu” means the rites according to Vedic injunctions – meaning: whatever activities that can be done through jnana [knowledge]. That itself is “I”. “Kratu” = yoga with “soma.” — Begin Footnote. — “somadhArA ksharet yA tu brahmarakshAt varAnane
peetnAnandamayastAṃ yah sa eva madyasAdhakam” – Agamasarah.
 — End Footnote. — “Soma” is the name of the moon. The nectar that falls from this moon – that is nourishment – meaning: “amrita” [nectar of immortality]. Whatever there is to be seen in the cosmos – the nourishment of all of that is accomplished by this “amrita.” (See “Adhiyajna” in Chapter 8, sloka 4 [of the Pranab Gita].) Whenever anything is ingested in the body – meaning: food – when that food goes into the stomach, it gets digested by the digestive fire. After that the “siti” — Begin Footnote. — Excretal/fecal substances. — End Footnote. — goes to the opening of the “siti” [see footnote 3], the liquid to the opening of the liquid – all of the waste products are thrown out by the apana vayu. That which remains as the essence, that which the fire does not destroy – that little bit is called “amrita” [nectar]. That amrita takes the spinal column as its recourse, and through the aid of the vital air, it goes to the connecting points of every particle and rebuilds the parts that have worn away. Having done that, the amrita goes up to the Root Triangle in the Sahasrar. That triangle has three mouths. One mouth connects with the ida nadi, another mouth connects with the pingala nadi, and another mouth connects with the sushumna nadi. The current that moves about in the body through the ida nadi – that current nourishes the body. The sadhak will notice that when breath is flowing through the left nostril, there is no hunger. And the current that flows through the sushumna nadi, that expands the sadhak’s knowledge/awareness. And the current that flows through the pingala nadi – Mahamaya in the form of the sun consumes that current. (The sadhak will notice that when breath is flowing through the right nostril – at that time he/she will become hungry. This is because of the erosion of the nectarous properties causing a rebuilding/reconstituting to be necessary – meaning: food will be needed at that time. To make known the need for food is that which is called “hunger.”) When the sadhak, through the method taught by guru, takes the tongue into the cave of the throat/neck, turns it upwards and goes along the western side of the nasal cavity, goes past the place of “shleshma,” and leans the tongue to the left side, the sadhak will right away find the well of nectar – meaning: “brahmarandhra.” From that place, amrita [nectar] goes to the pingala. If the door of flow to the pingala is [yogically] blocked, and, with clenched teeth, if the tongue is pressed, the yoni-place that is seen [when that is done] – at that yoni-place, the current of the nectar, connecting with the linga in the well, goes on flowing. That nectar takes recourse in the tongue, comes to the area of digestion and falls into the “vaishvanara” [digestive fire]. But the “vaishvanara” is not able to consume that nectar, yet that nectar satisfies that “vaishvanara” and [that nectar then] takes recourse in the spinal column. And once again, that nectar gives nourishment to all of the connecting points of the particles, and rises up to the Root Triangle in the Sahasrar. This coming and going goes on repeatedly. When this condition comes into being, the usual erosion of nourishment ends completely. The disappearance of this usual destruction is called “parinam shunyata” [being devoid of limitedness/impermanence/destruction]. The one who has the “parinam shunyata” – that is the one who is “aparinami” [without limitation]. That which is “aparinami” – that itself is Sat [Truth/Reality], Brahman, or “I”. Now dear sadhak! Understand what the words “ahaṃ kratuh” mean.
Ahaṃ yajna [I am the fire rite]. This gathering and offering is called “yajna.” The One in Whom all yajnas exist – He is Vishnu (viSh + N + u). “ViSh = pervading or pervasion, N = “nirguna” [without attributes], “u” = the union of the five gods – meaning: Shiva, Shakti, Ganesh, Vishnu, Surya – melting these five gods into one comprises the “union of the five gods.” In this state, everything is One; no gunas [primal qualities] act – like sugar mixed in with sugar-cane juice. Because It pervades everything/everyone, the Cosmos-pervading Consciousness/Spirit Self is [known as] “Vishnu.” To gather and offer, and make nourishment within the cosmos of this body is “palan” [carrying out the yajna according to injunctions; or: nourishing]. The Consciousness-Truth by which that carrying out is accomplished – That is Vishnu. Thus, it is Vishnu Who is the Lord of yajnas, and therefore, “I” am yajna as well.
 
Ahaṃ svadhA [I am the offering]. “Svadha” is the wife of “Agni” [fire]. Another name for “Agni” is “Teja” [energy; light; force]. That this Shakti Who is the beloved of Teja is also “I” – this state cannot really be expressed by speech. Dear sadhak! Understand that in order to get to Brahman-ness from jiva-ness, the Maha-Shakti that supports the effort to rise to the upper side of the chitta – it is She Who is “Svadha.” “Sva” means “self.” And to start from one place, go on, and then come to rest in the same place is called “dha” – like the “sam” in music. — Begin Footnote. — “Sam” [pronounced like “sum”] is the first beat of a metric cycle in Indian classical music. As the cycle repeats throughout the presentation of a piece, beat number one returns again and again. It is also the beat on which main phrases within the performance, as well as the entire performance itself, conclude. — End Footnote. — That I left My Self and madly ran around in the fragmentation of creation, and that, after experiencing creation, I returned to the same place from which I ran away – that I came back and arrived at that same “I” – this is My “dha.” That is why “I” am “svadha.”

Ahaṃ aushadham [I am the medicine]. “Aushadh” [medicine] means that which ends illness – [meaning:] keeps the jiva [individual living being] alive. For as long as jiva remains a “jiva” [individuated being], for that long there is no chance of his/her survival. The destiny of a jiva is to experience birth and death. This experiencing of birth and death is called “janmavyadhi” [the disease of having taken birth]. The doctor to cure this illness is guru. The words of the “I” that flows out of guru’s divine mouth – that is called “aushadh” [medicine]. By applying that continuously, that ends the activity of jiva-ness in the form of birth and death, brings one into “I”-ness, and makes one “I”. The [personal] self too becomes “I”. That is why “I” am “aushadh” [medicine].
 
Ahaṃ mantra [I am mantra]. That which brings “trana” [deliverance] to “mana” [mind] – that is called “mantra.” The dharma of mind is volition and non-volition. Letting go of one thing, grasping another thing, letting go of that or another thing, and grasping yet another thing – like a leech, this work of the mind is going on without rest. When this mind becomes completely devoid of vrittis [innate engagements] – that non-vritti state of the mind is “I”. That is why “I” am “mantra.”
 
Ahaṃ Ajyam [I am the ghee]. Ajya means “havi” [burnt offering]. That which transmutes/transmigrates – that is “havi.” This is because: via the burning of an offered substance, the substance takes its subtle nature, mixes with the air-element, rises up to the space-element and resolves all five elements – meaning: sacrifices them. And [after that,] becoming re-empowered with the new power [due to the rite], every element now acts in a thousand ways. This rite brings together all of the necessary and related powers of the active forces. Thus, now they give rise to many beautiful new bodies of creation. This version is for the outer world. And as for the inner yoga, dear sadhak, offer as “havi” the “I” into the “I”, and see and understand this. That external-facing “I” of yours (the downward directed functionality) – gather up, gather up, gather up that “I” until all gathering up of that “I” is finished, and then, when you go forward to dive into the original “I”, then just see once that it is from that very [original] “I” that you turned away, sucked up your gut [or: tightened your belt] and took up the creation-facing vrittis [activities]. And so many things you created! Now, you are gathering up all of that creation, and the “I” from which you left to go roaming about – you are becoming that very same “I” again! That is why “ajya” or “havi” means “becoming again” – meaning: “I” AM “I”.
 
Ahaṃ agni [I am the fire]. I am the fire as well. “Fire” means that which consumes the place from which it comes – meaning: that which eats the very place of its emergence. There is fire within wood, but the wood does not light up by itself. But if two pieces of wood are rubbed together, fire comes forth, and the place of its own emergence – the wood – it consumes that very thing. Later, it [the fire] also comes to an end. For as long as there is the wood and the charcoal, for that long is the name “urdhashikha” [rising flame] given to fire – meaning: something with a flame in the upper direction. When I entered the womb of Maya, and upon entering, hid my True Form – at that time I existed with the body of Maya, like the fire that is dormant within the wood. Whatever negative conditions or positive conditions that came upon the wood [body] – I experienced those things along with the wood [experiencing them]. It is like that in Maya as well. This is the creation-facing vritti’s [tendency’s] wood. As soon as the time came about for the “I”-facing vritti [tendency] to be taken up, the lord of my salvation, Srigurudev, took both of those “facings,” put them together and vigorously rubbed them, and I, immediately, burst aflame. The yoni of mine [the place of emergence], Maya or Mahat – I consumed that and, after Kriya, I automatically came above and took rest – meaning: I became “I”. Therefore, “I” am fire as well.
 
Ahaṃ huta [I am the offering rite]. The word “huta” means “rite of burnt offerings” – meaning: the guru-instructed Kriya by which the matters of this world are offered into the “I” – meaning: [offered into] the fire of Brahman – by doing which one can have Emancipation – that Kriya. That Kriya is also “I”. 