#### Prose 

श्रद्धावान् लभते ज्ञानं तत्पर: संयतेन्द्रिय: |
ज्ञानं लब्ध्वा परां शान्तिमचिरेणाधिगच्छति || 39||
śhraddhāvān labhate jñānaṁ tat-paraḥ sanyatendriyaḥ
jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śhāntim achireṇādhigachchhati

 #### Bengali Translation 

The one who is reverent, devoted and has his/her senses under control – that one attains gyana. Attaining gyana, that being quickly attains Supreme Peace.

 #### Commentary 

The sadhak has to know gyana by following the methods of “pranipat” [submission], “pariprashna” [enquiry] and “seva” [service] [as stated in] sloka 34 [of this Chapter 4]. As those three methods come to fruition (the realization of their perfection happening all together), and thereby one knows gyana, as one goes beyond the “annamaya kosha” [physical body] and as one goes up to the head through the Kriya of the Sahasrar, three states of consciousness – which are the results of each of those methods – come into being. They are: (1) “shraddha,” (2) “tatpara,” [and] (3) “samyatendriya” [see following paragraph for spiritual definitions and explanations]. “Shraddha”: “shrat” = “vishvas”  (“vigatashvas” [beyond breath) + “dha” = to have “dharan” [hold; concentrated focus; apprehension]. From the Kriya of the breath, taking the mind up and holding [full attention] within is called “shraddha.” — Begin Footnote. — This is that which is known as “putting mind in mind.” — End Footnote. — When one reaches this state – that is when the sadhak is “shraddhavan.” After being “shraddhavan,” the subtler than the subtlest happenings of seeing, hearing and knowing that go on taking place – one has to unite all of them and establish them in “Tat-Brahman” - meaning: in the Bindu-Naad. That is the “tatpara” state. If it is done like this, the vrittis of seeing, hearing, knowing and such – because they are drawn to the “One,” they cast off all of their different activities and become “samyata” - meaning: they merge together and become one. This is the “samyatendriya” state. When this state comes, the sadhak attains gyana – meaning: the One Whose True Form until now was known within by the sadhak through seeing, hearing, knowing and such – now, all of those seeing, hearing, knowing and such melt and become one, and fall into the sadhak him/herself, and all of the vrittis of the chitta come to an end; the “I” of the sadhak becomes gyana Itself. This is the attainment of gyana. Immediately upon this attainment of gyana, Supreme Peace – meaning: “Kaivalya” [Only-ness] or the Establishment in Brahman is attained. — Begin Footnote. — These three states of being “shraddhavan” etc. are the results of “pranipat,” [submission] “pariprashna” [enquiry] and “seva” [service]. Thus, even before the practice of “pranipat” etc. in the subtle form, the sadhak has to become “shraddhavan” [faithful; reverent], “tatpara” [devoted] and “samyatendriya” [controller of the senses] in the gross/outer ways. Otherwise, one will not have the right to practice “pranipat” and such. The gross/outer ways are: “shraddhavan” - having faith in the words of guru-vedanta; “tatpara” - with the help of that faith, performing Kriya; and “samyatendriya” - the practice of continence. — End Footnote. —