#### Prose 

समं सर्वेषु भूतेषु तिष्ठन्तं परमेश्वरम् |
विनश्यत्स्वविनश्यन्तं य: पश्यति स पश्यति || 28||
samaṁ sarveṣhu bhūteṣhu tiṣhṭhantaṁ parameśhvaram
vinaśhyatsv avinaśhyantaṁ yaḥ paśhyati sa paśhyati

 #### Bengali Translation 

The one who sees “Parameshvara” [Supreme God] as residing in all things in the same way, and as Indestructible when all phenomena are destroyed – that is the one who sees all.

 #### Commentary 

“Param” means “only,” “supreme.” And “ishvara” means Brahman enjoined with Maya. There is no light in Prakriti; light is in Purush. The delusional desires, activities and knowing-power that rise up in Prakriti due to the contact with Purush – Prakriti puts those delusions into Purush, takes the light of Purush, dresses up Purush as “lord,” and dresses up Herself as self-luminous and non-doer – that dual-self state is called “Ishvara.” — Begin Footnote. — The iris of the eye is round and small. The amount of great space that can be captured by that power of sight that comes from that iris – that is actually “mahan” [great]. Because the place from which the power of sight issues forth is round – because of that, the amount of space that the sight can capture – all of it seems to be round. Who knows how many irises of eyes are there in that huge sphere; that cannot be counted; it cannot even be determined by thinking. In the same way, within the Totality of Brahman, the number of the spherical mazes [illusion] born of Maya that can be perceived – meaning: the union of Maya and Brahman – within that very area [in Brahman], due to the error of contact with the guna-endowed Maya and the progress of those gunas [qualities], [Brahman] takes the name of [or: becomes] “Saguna Brahman” [Brahman with attributes]. This Saguna Brahman is that which is known as “Ishvara” [personal God]. Within the area run by this Saguna Brahman, there are innumerable Maya-mutated universes and solar systems that have found their places, like those irises of the eyes. The sphere of the eye is far from the sky and is small. And within the Eternal, Unattributed Brahman, the unreal, pure Maya’s place of residence is a lie and is far from Ishvara and small. Because Ishvara has taken Maya as “His own,” He is called “Mayavashi” [under the power of Maya]. And as much as the Sky of Consciousness has come down towards Maya, that much of it is under the power of Maya. The state of being under the power of Maya is “jiva” [embodied soul]. In the particular ways that this jiva has come near Maya – according to those ways, it has taken names according to greater and lesser nearness to Maya, [names] such as gods, demons, humans, animals, birds, insects, plants, stones etc. — End Footnote. — The “Ishvara” that has “only-ness” and “supreme-ness” – that one is called “Parameshvara.” Just as: if a fortress is made with iron walls in the great space – that there is no fragmentation that takes place in space – in the same way, the smearing of Prakritic illusion or falsehoods does not touch Brahman. Even though, in the eyes of the ignorant, space appears to be divided by the walls of the fortress, in the eyes of the wise there is no fragmentation taking place in the great space. Just as [the wise one] sees the one undivided great space inside and outside mountains, walls, trees, stones [and such] – in the same way, the One Parameshvara is present equally, like undivided (without boundaries) space, within everything. Prakritic changes do not make that eternal truth change. The one who has the adeptness to see this – that is the one who sees that which is unknown to others. If the sadhak matches up his/her purvavastha [pre-state] of Kriya, Kriyavastha [during-Kriya-state], paravastha [post-state] of Kriya, and the paravastha of the paravastha of Kriya [post-post-state of Kriya], this delusion will not remain.