#### Prose 

बाह्यस्पर्शेष्वसक्तात्मा विन्दत्यात्मनि यत्सुखम् |
स ब्रह्मयोगयुक्तात्मा सुखमक्षयमश्नुते || 21||
bāhya-sparśheṣhvasaktātmā vindatyātmani yat sukham
sa brahma-yoga-yuktātmā sukham akṣhayam aśhnute

 #### Bengali Translation 

The person whose heart is not addicted to the external worldly experience only enjoys whatever happiness comes from the Self. After that, that person becomes one with Brahman and enjoys Unending Happiness.

 #### Commentary 

[In order to instruct the sadhak about the reason for a knower of Brahman to be of steady intellect and be free of delusion, it is being stated in this sloka that the person devoid of addiction to the worldly experience becomes one who is at peace, and attains Unending Happiness.] After the body and mind become purified through the Kriyas of pranayam and such, the mind leaves the external worldly experiences of sound and touch and such and enters within. Then the eyes do not want to look [outside] any more. The mind does not feel like going to anything outside. The addiction [to external things] also does not remain. This state is had with just a little sadhana. At this time, upon looking at the happenings at Kutastha, the mind, life-force, senses – all become enraptured in Bliss. This is that which is called “the enjoyment of happiness from the Bliss of the Self.” The one who has known this happiness, only that person knows. — Begin Footnote. — “hantAtmagyasya dheerasya khelato bhogaleelaya na hi saṃsAravAheekairmoodhaih saha samAnata yat padaṃ prepsavo deenAh shakrAdyAh sarvadevatAh aho tattra sthito yogee na harShamupagacchati” ashtAvakra saṃhitA (4:1-2) [“Oh, the wise and settled knower of the Self, playing the sport of enjoyments, has no similarity whatsoever to the deluded beasts of samsara Oh [or: truly], the yogi does not feel elated even when abiding in the state hankered after disconsolately by the gods from Indra onwards” Ashtavakra Samhita [a spiritual treatise] – Chapter 4, slokas 1-2] — End Footnote. — That is not something to be explained by language. After this state, the process stated in sloka 25 of Chapter 4 [of the Gita] begins – meaning: the sadhak offers oneself in the Fire of Brahman and attains Brahman-samadhi. The current that goes on flowing in the chitta after enjoying this samadhi – that is known as “Brahmananda” [the Bliss of Brahman]. Whoever experiences this Bliss of Brahman just once, that person's mind/heart no longer is attracted to the worldly experience; that person just stays intoxicated in that Bliss [of Brahman]. And that never ends. Thus, that person enjoys Unending Happiness. It is for this reason that the knower of Brahman does not become deluded by the dear and not-dear experiences of the world. Therefore, dear sadhak! You too withdraw all of your senses from the external worldly experience. This hint is being given.