#### Prose 

अनन्तश्चास्मि नागानां वरुणो यादसामहम् |
पितृणामर्यमा चास्मि यम: संयमतामहम् || 29||
anantaśh chāsmi nāgānāṁ varuṇo yādasām aham
pitṝīṇām aryamā chāsmi yamaḥ sanyamatām aham

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among the “nagas,” I am “Ananta,” and among the gods of the waters, I am “Varuna.” Among the ancestors I am “Aryama,” and among “samyama,” I am “Yama.”

 #### Commentary 

“Ananta” is that which has no boundaries, no source. “Naga”[snake-like] = “n” + “aga”; “n” = not; “aga” = serpent – meaning: that which is not a serpent, but is like a snake. Snakes have venom. This entity does not have venom. A snake’s beginning and end can be seen with its narrowness or girth. This entity is only long (it can be seen in Kutastha). This kind of “naga” is called “Ananta.” It is he who is the bed of Vishnu on the Ocean of Sweet Milk. That “Vishnu” is “I”. “Ananta” is always absorbed in Me, and therefore existing as “I”. Thus, among “nagas,” “I” am “Ananta.”
 
VaruNoyAdasAmaham – “varuna” – “va” – means “encircling,” and the sound “unan” means to be connected to a thing – meaning: the one who is encircling. The Earth is encircled by seas, or the liquid-element. “YAdah” – meaning: the gods of the waters – like: wells, lakes, springs, rivers, tributaries, etc. All of these are life-powers in the world. Within all of them is the liquid-element – meaning: “I” am presiding within them as the Nourishing Power. The place of residence for all of these small powers is the “I”, the All-Powerful Infinite God “Varuna.”
 
PitṛNAmarmyamA chAsmi [among the ancestors, I am “Aryama”] – “AryamA” – “arya” (“ṛ” = going) + “mana” [mind] + “kanin.” “Kanin” means “receiving illumination.” Thus, the one who, after casting off the body [dying], goes to the plane of the ancestors and attains Supreme-ness and Illumination – that is the one who is “Aryama.”
 
Dear sadhak! Now look. When, through particular Kriya, you abide in subtle form in the brahmanadi within the “chitrani” – at that time, you are not in the physical body. What to say, whether there is a physical body or not – even that is not in your awareness [at this time]. In this state, the masculine form (the Form of the Self) that you see within the masses of energy at Kutastha – know that that is verily “Aryama,” the lord of the ancestors. This holy deity comes at the appropriate time to give encouragement to the sadhak and blesses him/her. A Luminescent Form of Oneself that is different from [or: other than] the physical body can be witnessed. Thus, “I” am “Aryama” as well.
 
Yamah saṃyamatAham – “Yama” is the name of the lord of the abode of halting. “Yam” = to do “nivritti” [spiritual withdrawal] + “an” = one who is connected to it – meaning: the one who causes “nivritti” to happen is “Yama.” “Nivritti” [non-wave] means the waveless state of the antahkarana [personal consciousness]. After pratyahar [spiritual in-turning], the state that comes from the aggregate of dharana [spiritual concentration], dhyan [meditation] and samadhi is called “samyama” [all-halting; all-absorbed]. The state in which there is no aggression, where truth [non-lying] (“satya parahitaṃ proktam” [truth-ness is that which benefits the well-being of others]), non-stealing, chastity, and non-grasping are established – that is the state called “yama.” The state in which I live as if I am dead, even though I am alive (not death, not sleep, not swoon – yet a certain kind of effort-free and suffering-free way of living) – when this becomes a state that lasts for very, very long periods (what to say, even the anxiety of the breaking of dharna-dhyan-samadhi is not there) – it is then that the state of “yama” comes about. “Samyama” is a small state of being, and “yama” is a great state of being. Both of these are My States. Thus, among “samyama” I am “Yama” [dead while alive]. This body is that which is called “Pretpur” [the abode of ghosts]. 