#### Prose 

देही नित्यमवध्योऽयं देहे सर्वस्य भारत |
तस्मात्सर्वाणि भूतानि न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि || 30||
dehī nityam avadhyo ’yaṁ dehe sarvasya bhārata
tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni na tvaṁ śhochitum arhasi

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Bharat [Arjuna]! This embodied One (the Self) is eternally abiding in every body and cannot be killed. Therefore, do not grieve over all of this phenomena.

 #### Commentary 

Dear sadhak! You are “Bharat” - the consciousness abiding in the Light of the Self. You know, and you have directly experienced, that this embodied Consciousness-Self (“dehi” [the embodied]) – It is present in every body, and cannot be killed in any situation. Whatever there is in this world that is “gain and loss” oriented, whether it is conscious or inert, or germinating – all of that is “body” [material]. Therefore, they are all endowed with the six mutations [existence, birth, growth, change, decay and death]. There are changes of the states of those bodies, or there is the destruction of those bodies, but there is no change or death for the Self. It is Inexhaustible and Eternal; thus, It cannot be killed in any situation [in any way]. All of these expressions of phenomena – such as Bhishma, Drona etc. - that are bringing forth attachment and delusion in your mind – at their foundations they are all impermanent. Because all of these have come, that means they will go as well, for sure. It is absolutely certain that they will be disintegrated through the power of finite-ness. But that Consciousness-Substance that is the foundation of all of these expressions of phenomena, That has no finite-ness, no disintegration or destruction. Therefore, That has no divisions of time such as past, future etc. That is Eternally Present. Therefore, do not let go of the Eternally Present and grieve over this impermanent body which is just phenomena. This grief is unbecoming of you.