#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
अयति: श्रद्धयोपेतो योगाच्चलितमानस: |
अप्राप्य योगसंसिद्धिं कां गतिं कृष्ण गच्छति || 37||
arjuna uvācha
ayatiḥ śhraddhayopeto yogāch chalita-mānasaḥ
aprāpya yoga-sansiddhiṁ kāṅ gatiṁ kṛiṣhṇa gachchhati

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said: “O Krishna, the one who, upon taking up yoga, does not have good discipline in the practice of the yoga, but stays with mind aware of the Reality, or the one who falls from yoga due to the restlessness of mind – as these ones therefore do not get “yogasamsiddhi” [attainment of yoga] (Kaivalya [Only-ness]), what kind of destiny do these yogis get?” 

 #### Commentary 

That the performance of yoga will bring the attainment of perfection to everyone – it is not so. Many have to die while still in an unperfected state. And again, the unperfected yogis are of two types. One: the one who performs yoga upon having been quite reverent in the beginning, but later, becoming lax and uncaring, does not take care to perform Kriya in the appropriate way but stays aware of the Reality. This person is “shraddhayopetah ayatih” [undisciplined but with faith]. And another: the one who has gone forward in yoga with reverence and correctly, but, at the time of death, has not been able to keep steady attention to escape psychic error and is thus unable to enter the Divine. And thus, because the mind has broken off from the Self-Substance, this yogi has fallen – this person is “yogacchalitamanasah” - [one whose mind has fallen from yoga [due to psychic delusion and not self-will]]. Now what will happen to the sadhaks who are in these two kinds of states? Both of these types, because they have not had the attainment of yoga, cannot have the destiny of Emancipation or the Destiny of no return. Then what kind of destiny will they get?