#### Prose 

यथा नदीनां बहवोऽम्बुवेगा:
समुद्रमेवाभिमुखा द्रवन्ति |
तथा तवामी नरलोकवीरा
विशन्ति वक्त्राण्यभिविज्वलन्ति || 28||
yathā pradīptaṁ jvalanaṁ pataṅgā
viśhanti nāśhāya samṛiddha-vegāḥ
tathaiva nāśhāya viśhanti lokās
tavāpi vaktrāṇi samṛiddha-vegāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Just as all rivers with their many torrential currents go towards the sea and enter the sea itself – in the same way, all of those heroic ones of the human world are entering Your omnipresent and blazing mouths. 

 #### Commentary 

“NaralokaveerA” – “na” = negation; “rah” = revelation; illumination – meaning: one in whom there is no light that illuminates either oneself or anything else– that is called “nara” [no light]. For as long as the human being stays with the greed of grasping and rejecting, for that long is the human being [in the state of] “nara.” “Nara” means that which has no light. “Loka” [abode[s]] means all that is visible. And “veera” [conqueror] means that which has the capability to bind/capture. Thus, [“naralokaveera” means] the sights which are without illumination, which are Mayic things, and which also have the power to bind. Whatever/whomever is like this – that thing/that one is “naralokaveera.” Now dear sadhak, see. The good and bad things springing forth from your antahkarana – due to the current of samskaras [latent tendencies], they come from somewhere, show themselves to you, bind you in your antahkarana with their impressions, and within a moment enter into that destructive light. All of this is Space. Even if appearing as imaginary flowers [beautiful things], they are [nevertheless] against the path of Brahman. That is why it is being said: just as water runs with torrential force into the ocean and blends with it, and just as it has no more beingness – in the same way, that falsehood of Maya – all of those “naralokaveera” – are losing their beingness by falling into Your light – meaning: the sadhak’s delusional ignorance is being resolved.