#### Prose 

यस्त्विन्द्रियाणि मनसा नियम्यारभतेऽर्जुन |
कर्मेन्द्रियै: कर्मयोगमसक्त: स विशिष्यते || 7||
yas tvindriyāṇi manasā niyamyārabhate ’rjuna
karmendriyaiḥ karma-yogam asaktaḥ sa viśhiṣhyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Arjuna! But the one who controls all of the sense-organs along with the mind and begins karma-yoga by using the organs of action – it is that “asakta” (without attachment; non-addicted) person who is worthy – meaning: one who becomes “yukta” [connected/united].

 #### Commentary 

Sitting cross-legged, putting the heel of one foot at the anus, and the heel of the other foot at the root of the sex organ. Start Footnote. One can also do sadhana comfortably in “swastikasana” [description follows]. Upon sitting cross-legged, there are creases where the two thighs and the two knees fold [the creases formed by the folding of the lower legs against the thighs]. Putting the two feet in those two creases, and being locked in a triangle-like posture, and sitting easily with the back, head and neck aligned is “swastikasana.” End Footnote. making the arms/hands straight on top of the knees which are aligned according to the posture, keeping the wrists [there], making the spinal column, neck and head straight and aligned, putting attention on Kutastha and keeping the organs of perception mentally fixed on whatever is happening there [at Kutastha], and then beginning the “karma” [act] by moving prana according to the instructions of guru – one can, after some time, become “yukta” [connected/united]. Later, remaining seated in the same way, by using the fingers of both hands and closing the doors of the eyes, ears, nose and mouth according to the instructions of guru, “paramaṃ puruShaṃ divyaṃ yAti” - meaning: the Supreme Person is witnessed – the One Who is spoken about and described as “Hiranmaya Purush” [Golden Person; Radiant Person] in the Upanishads. Start Footnote. See Chandogya Upanishad – Discourse 1, Section 6, sloka 6:“yatha yadavaitadAdityasya shuklaṃ bhAh saiva sA, atha yanneelaṃ paraṃ kṛShNaṃ tadam tatsAma, atha yah eyo'ntarAditye niraNmayah puruSho dṛshyate hiraNyashmashrurhiraNyakesha ApraNasvAtsarva eva suvarNah” Bengali translation [of the above sloka from the Chandogya Upanishad] - And this, whatever is the bright “bhah” (radiance) of the Sun, that is “sa,” and that supremely blue [deep blue] dark radiance – that is verily “ama.” That (the coupled radiance of the bright and dark radiance) is known as “Sama.” And there, that Being, Who is seen as the “Hiranmaya Purush” [Golden Person; Radiant Person] within that Sun – that Person has a golden beard and golden hair. Everything is golden, radiating from that Person's golden nails (resplendent with Light). End Footnote. That Person is verily the Supreme Destination. One who, via pranayam, has purified the heart, has become unattached, and by using the organs of action has closed the nine doors, and has become focused and dedicated in this sadhana of the Spiritual Supreme Person (does the performance of [yogic] karma-yoga) – it is that person who is “connected/united”; it is that person who is, indeed, eminent.