#### Prose 

कुलक्षये प्रणश्यन्ति कुलधर्मा: सनातना: |
धर्मे नष्टे कुलं कृत्स्नमधर्मोऽभिभवत्युत || 40||
kula-kṣhaye praṇaśhyanti kula-dharmāḥ sanātanāḥ
dharme naṣhṭe kulaṁ kṛitsnam adharmo ’bhibhavaty uta

 #### Bengali Translation 

If the lineage is destroyed, all of age-old dharmas regarding lineage will be destroyed. If dharmas are destroyed, then adharma [unrighteous ways] will take over (swallow up) all lineages.

 #### Commentary 

“Kulakshaya” [destruction of lineage]: “ku” - the worldly ways related to sound, touch etc. [sense perceptions]; “la” - the desire for enjoyments. “Vishaya[s]” [matters; subjects] are of two types. The enjoyments/partakings that happen via the eyes, ears, nose etc. externally is “vishaya.” And again, the subtle experiences of sight, taste and such that happen internally when one is directed towards the Self – that is also “vishaya.” The first is “external vishaya”; thus they are matter-oriented/physical. The second is “internal vishaya”; thus they are subtle. The external vishayas wrap one up in bhoga, and with the internal vishayas one avoids bhoga. These material and subtle experiences of vishayas happen verily via the seventeen “kalaas” [active functioning parts]. Ten senses, five pranas, mind and intellect – these are what are called the “seventeen kalaas.” Desires, detachment etc. - whatever vrittis there are, all of them verily rise up from these seventeen kalaas and are known by all kinds of names. The aggregate of all of these [vrittis] are what is being called “lineage” [here]. In the war for the Self – that which is called the “the sadhana battles” - these [vrittis] get destroyed. Each of these [vrittis] has a particular active quality – or “dharma.” Like: the dharma of the eyes is seeing; the dharma of the ears is hearing; the dharma of the mind is resolve or doubt, etc. Because these dharmas are born with the [birth of the] body and are ever-present in consciousness, they are called “sanatana” [age-old] – meaning: (everyone's) age-old [ways]. If that “lineage-destruction” takes place, then this “sanatana dharma” [age-old way] is destroyed. Like: if the eyes become powerless, one cannot see; if the ears lose their strength, one cannot hear; if the mind is weak, one cannot have resolve or doubt, etc. After this kind of annihilation – meaning: destruction – whatever remains will be taken over by adharma [unrighteous ways] – meaning: everything will be turned upside-down, like hearing “kaan” [ears] when someone is saying “dhaan” [unhusked rice], or seeing yellow where there is white because of hepatitis, etc.