#### Prose 

जन्म कर्म च मे दिव्यमेवं यो वेत्ति तत्त्वत: |
त्यक्त्वा देहं पुनर्जन्म नैति मामेति सोऽर्जुन || 9||
janma karma cha me divyam evaṁ yo vetti tattvataḥ
tyaktvā dehaṁ punar janma naiti mām eti so ’rjuna

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Arjuna! The one who knows this True Form of My Birth and Actions, that one, after leaving the body [death], does not take appearance again [does not take birth again]. That one attains Me, verily.

 #### Commentary 

Those appearances, in order to carry out the actions of protecting sadhus from epoch to epoch, by the Beloved Deity in the forms of Beings Who are Consciousness-filled, knowledge-filled, mind-filled and such – incarnations which destroy evil-doers and settle dharma – all of that is done through His Own Self-Maya, or His Self-wished Births and Actions. All of that is “divya” [divine] (“div” = the inner sky + “ya” = settledness); this is because all of that [the aforementioned] is revealed [or: manifests] within, not outside. The one who, through the performance of Kriya, upon rising within through the progressive steps of sadhana, goes on knowing those [Divine] Births and Actions – it is that one who knows in the “tattvatah” (direct and true [or: firsthand]) way. One cannot know by teachings in words/talks or by reading books. If one knows those Births and Actions of the Beloved Deity, directly and firsthand, at the time of leaving the body (death), the inner eye, because of not being covered by the coverings of the worldly experience, remains connected to the Light of Pure Consciousness. Thus, there is no possibility there to take birth again. One attains the Supreme Destination (the Permanence in the Self).