#### Prose 

आरुरुक्षोर्मुनेर्योगं कर्म कारणमुच्यते |
योगारूढस्य तस्यैव शम: कारणमुच्यते || 3||
ārurukṣhor muner yogaṁ karma kāraṇam uchyate
yogārūḍhasya tasyaiva śhamaḥ kāraṇam uchyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

The “muni” [sage] that wishes to be mounted on yoga – for him/her the sadhana is karma [yogic practice]. But once that sage is mounted on yoga, then “shama” [serenity] – meaning: the abandoning of karma – is his/her sadhana.

 #### Commentary 

The one who lets go of the desires for the outcomes of karma [actions], who merges the mind in God — Begin Footnote. — The yogi should practice merging into God in the microcosm.  — End Footnote. — (surrenders oneself) – that is the one who is “muni” [sage]. For as long as that person is not mounted on yoga – meaning: has not yet gone up to Kutastha in the Agya-chakra but is wanting to do so – for that long, only karma [spiritual practice] – meaning: offering prana in the appropriate places of the six chakras via pranayam – is his/her sadhana; there is no other sadhana [at this time]. This is the “arurukshu” [wanting to be mounted [on yoga]] state. After going up to the Agya, upon continuously rising from one chakra to another via pranayam, as one crosses beyond the kingdom of karma, the prana-karma ceases by itself. Then “shama” [serenity] comes about – meaning: the inner senses can no longer be thrown off. It is only when one is mounted on yoga in that way and can no longer be thrown off that mind is put in mind in the right way. At that time, there is only the knowing of “hiranmaye pare koShe virajaṃ brahma niShkalam” [in the golden luminous sheath that is beyond, dwells the attribute-less Brahman], and no vrittis remain. One becomes absorbed. This is verily the seventh limb/step of “ashtanga yoga” [yoga of eight limbs/steps] known as “dhyanayoga” [yoga of meditation]. This dhyanayoga is verily the Sahasrar-Kriya. The culmination of this state is “gyanayoga” [yoga of knowledge/wisdom]. [What kind of state attained through Kriya makes one become “yogarudha” [mounted on yoga] – that is being spoken about in the following sloka.]5 