#### Prose 

ब्रह्मण्याधाय कर्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा करोति य: |
लिप्यते न स पापेन पद्मपत्रमिवाम्भसा || 10||
brahmaṇyādhāya karmāṇi saṅgaṁ tyaktvā karoti yaḥ
lipyate na sa pāpena padma-patram ivāmbhasā

 #### Bengali Translation 

One who performs all karma [actions] upon having offered them all to Brahman – like the lotus leaves on water [being above the water], is not touched by sin.

 #### Commentary 

In slokas 6, 7 and 8 [of this Chapter 5] – being yoga-united, muni [sage], Brahman-sannyas [ending in Brahman], and then again being yoga-united and being a knower of Truth – these progressively ascending steps of sadhana that have been stated – one who has not yet followed that progression and has not yet become a knower of Truth – the procedure with which that sadhak should practice Kriya – that is being spoken about in this sloka – meaning: it is being said that that sadhak must cut off his/her connection with karma [actions] and act by offering [the actions] to Brahman. The space-filled canal that extends within the sushumna nadi going from the Muladhar to the Sahasrar – that is called “brahmanadi.” — Begin Footnote. — The brahmanadi, goes up within the vajrachitra [nadi] – which is within the sushumna [nadi] – and pierces all of the lotuses. Entering the mind within this [brahmanadi] is called “awakening the Kundalini Shakti.” When the mind enters into this [brahmanadi], the pure intellect comes forth. Whatever there is to be known is known. For this reason it [brahmanadi] is also called “gyana-nadi” [nadi of knowledge]. One mouth of this brahmanadi is at the Muladhar, and the other mouth bifurcates into two paths reaching the brahmarandhra in the Sahasrar [from two opposite sides] (see Illustration No. 2 [in the Introduction section of the Pranab Gita]). The mouth at the Muladhar is open. The mouth at the Sahasrar is closed. For the perfected person [realized being], the mouth at the Sahasrar opens up. That is what is called “the bursting open of the brahmarandhra.” When the brahmarandhra is burst open, there is “videhamukti” [Liberation after leaving the body/dying]. The three mouths of ida, pingala and sushumna [nadis] are all one at the Muladhar. — End Footnote. — The space filled canal between the ida and pingala [nadis] is called “brahmanadi.” Taking recourse in that brahmanadi, prana and apana go on sporting in all of the lotuses. For the sake of chitta-purification, all of the types of practices that Srigurudev gives to the disciples (whatever suits the particular person) – all of those practices have to be performed by moving prana upon taking recourse in that Sky of Brahman. This is that which is called “offering to Brahman.” Through those types of practices, as one goes farther and farther above in these three nadis – particularly in the sushumna nadi – many wondrous visions are seen, and different powers of the different locations come forth and provide places of abidance to bind the sadahak into enjoyments. Far be it to even talk about being entranced by those visions or resorting to any of those powers, one should completely ignore and abandon all of those and keep attention only on Kutastha; and doing “mAmanusmaraNa” [meditating on Me; meditating on the Self or the Lord] continuously, one has to go straight upward; one must not make contact with anything [on the way up]. This is that which is called “cutting of the connection” [see last line of above paragraph]. If one practices in this way, one does not have to be bound by sin – meaning: one does not have to fall to the bindings of restlessness-born karma. Just as the lotus flower is born in water, grows in water, does not get covered up by water even though it lives in water, and no marks from water remain on it – in the same way, the sadhak who has offered all karma [yogic practices] to Brahman and cut off all connection to karma [the fruits being experienced along the way], actually takes recourse in karma itself [spiritual action] and goes up to the field above. The sadhak goes through the worldly experience due to prarabdha by taking recourse in karma itself [spiritual action], and even as he/she does so, does not become bound by karma [actions and their fruits].