#### Prose 

ब्रह्मार्पणं ब्रह्म हविर्ब्रह्माग्नौ ब्रह्मणा हुतम् |
ब्रह्मैव तेन गन्तव्यं ब्रह्मकर्मसमाधिना || 24||
brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ brahma-karma-samādhinā

 #### Bengali Translation 

Brahman is the offering, the fire created by Brahman in the Brahman-fire and the oblation is Brahman. The destination of the one who is in samadhi is also Brahman.

 #### Commentary 

Why is it that if karma [actions and their fruits] are completely dissolved if one's character is to do [acts] as if [acts] are yagya? The reason is this: as the mind enters the brahmanadi, because of the Light of Knowledge, one can see and know that “sarvaṃ brahmayaṃ jagat” [all is Brahman]. Thus, at that time, the knowledge that Brahman is everywhere comes about. For this reason, for the sadhak at that time, the offerings – meaning: all of the causalities of the body – by which the “yagya-karma” [acts of offering] are carried out – all of that is also full of Brahman. The “vaishvanara agni” [inner fire] that pervades the whole body as energy – that is also full of Brahman. That sadhak him/herself is full of Brahman. The sadhak's “havi” [consumable offerings] - meaning: the sadhak's prana and the Nectar falling from the Sahasrar and such consumable substances are full of Brahman. And the sadhak's fire offering in the form of oblations is also full of Brahman. In this way, in Brahman – meaning: by establishing mind, life force and activity in the Sky of Brahman in the brahmanadi – the sadhak attains Brahman Itself.