#### Prose 

मात्रास्पर्शास्तु कौन्तेय शीतोष्णसुखदु: खदा: |
आगमापायिनोऽनित्यास्तांस्तितिक्षस्व भारत || 14||
mātrā-sparśhās tu kaunteya śhītoṣhṇa-sukha-duḥkha-dāḥ
āgamāpāyino ’nityās tans-titikṣhasva bhārata

यं हि न व्यथयन्त्येते पुरुषं पुरुषर्षभ |
समदु:खसुखं धीरं सोऽमृतत्वाय कल्पते || 15||
yaṁ hi na vyathayantyete puruṣhaṁ puruṣharṣhabha
sama-duḥkha-sukhaṁ dhīraṁ so ’mṛitatvāya kalpate

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kaunteya [son of Kunti, or Arjuna]! All “matrasparsha” [contacts with the elements] (meaning: all of the worldly experiences conjoined with the vrittis [active components] of the senses) produce [experiences of] cold, heat, pleasure, pain [etc.]; those all come and go (endowed with “rising up and ending”); therefore they are impermanent. O Bharat [in this case: Arjuna]! Endure all such things. O “Purusharshabha” [man amongst men]! The steady and composed person who sees all of these (“matrasparsha”) - along with pleasure and pain – as the same, and who is not pained by them – it is that person who is fit to receive Immortality (Liberation).

 #### Commentary 

The eleven vrittis [active components] of the senses, including the mind, are called “matra.” The bumping together of these with the objects of phenomena is called “matrasparsha” [contact with “matra”]. From that bumping together, [the experiences of] cold, heat, pleasure, pain [etc.] arise. And because those [experiences] are “endowed with 'rising up and ending,'” they are impermanent. For this reason, one has to endure those [experiences] through “titiksha” [practice of endurance] – meaning: one has to be “duhkheShu anudvignamanAh sukheShu vigataspṛha” [unperturbed in suffering [and] detached in happiness] and tolerate them. During the time of going up the brahmanadi within the sushumna, while continuously doing “mamanusmaran” [meditating on the Self] chakra by chakra, many types of deluding/entrancing happenings come forth trying to attract one into partaking in different aspects of the sound-touch-sight-taste-smell experiences. If one becomes enchanted/deluded by them and the mind contacts them, then one becomes bound by them. But “bhoga” [enjoyment/partaking] does not remain forever; in due time, they finish. The thing that remains is the samskara-bondage [left over from those bhoga experiences]. By not giving a single glance to any of those worldly experiences, making the mind focused, pointing one's steady attention as fine as a needle towards the bindu in Kutastha and becoming ecstatically absorbed in that – one can have Immortality.  