#### Prose 

अयनेषु च सर्वेषु यथाभागमवस्थिता: |
भीष्ममेवाभिरक्षन्तु भवन्त: सर्व एव हि || 11||
ayaneṣhu cha sarveṣhu yathā-bhāgamavasthitāḥ
bhīṣhmamevābhirakṣhantu bhavantaḥ sarva eva hi

 #### Bengali Translation 

All of you stand at every entrance point of the military formation according to your particular station and, particularly, protect Bhishma.

 #### Commentary 

The meaning of saying “particularly protect Bhishma” is this: as long as the Chidabhas [reflected consciousness] – meaning: the love for the “I am the body” idea, or egoism, stays alive, even thousands and thousands of teachings on the Knowledge of Brahman can in no way and in no time destroy the mesh of the net of desires. “SarveShu ayaneShu” - the six chakras, such as the Muladhar etc., comprise the “road” - meaning: the “path” of yoga. Both of the pravritti and nivritti sides are in every chakra.
As:

Muladhar is on Pandava Side as, earth (Sahadeva) – security, serenity, and on the Kaurava Side as, desire/lust (Duryodhana).

Svadhisthan is on Pandava Side as, water (Nakul), and on the Kaurava Side as, anger (Duhshasana) and the fear of death (Jayadratha)  - they are considered as being together because they support each other.

Manipur is on Pandava Side as, fire/energy (Arjun) - forbearance/endurance, and on the Kaurava Side as, greed (Karna = obligatory/duty-bound actions and Vikarna = unnecessary/undutiful actions).

Anahata is on Pandava Side as, air (Bhima) – satiety, and on the Kaurava Side as, delusion (Shakuni – it is he who brought about delusion and made the Kaurava side become engaged in the dice game).

Vishuddha is on Pandava Side as, ether/space (Yudhishthira) - reverence, and on the Kaurava Side as, arrogance (Shala, the king of Madra).

Ajna is on Pandava Side as, Kutastha Chaitanya (Sri Krishna) - Resolution, and on the Kaurava Side as, miserliness, or avarice, or envy (Bhishma, Drona and Kripa).

Ashvatthama = fruits of actions.
(Note -- This was in table format in the original)

For every jiva, friends such as serenity and enemies such as lust come forth because of the results of actions. That is why Ashvatthama [representing fruits of actions] is present in all six of the locations.