#### Prose 

देवान्भावयतानेन ते देवा भावयन्तु व: |
परस्परं भावयन्त: श्रेय: परमवाप्स्यथ || 11||
devān bhāvayatānena te devā bhāvayantu vaḥ
parasparaṁ bhāvayantaḥ śhreyaḥ param avāpsyatha

 #### Bengali Translation 

Through this yagya, may you nourish the gods. May the gods nourish you. Through this mutual nourishing of each other, you will attain the supreme beneficence.

 #### Commentary 

In the path of sadhana – Shiva, Shakti, Vishnu, Surya and Ganapati – these five gods are worshipped. These five are the residing places of all gods, gandharvas, kinnaras [celestial beings] and such. Just by being a sadhak, one is the worshipper of these five. The reason is: in Bhurloka – at the Muladhar as Ganapati, in Bhuvarloka – at the Svadhisthan as Shakti, in Svarloka – at the Manipur as Surya, in Maharloka – at the Anahata as Vishnu, in Janaloka – at the Vishuddha as Shiva – One Brahman as these five for the beneficence of the sadhak. These five are “kshara brahman” [impermanent/destructible reality]. After the elements are purified through the worship of these “kshara” [impermanent divinities], the worship of Akshara Brahman [Permanent/Indestructible Reality] Kutastha Purush takes place in the Tapoloka – at the Agya. After that, there is Satyaloka, where, by knowing the Supreme Person at the Sahasrar and becoming the knower of all, one becomes That which is beyond Sat and asat.Through this yagya [spiritual act] one has to nourish those gods – meaning: awaken them through oblation. When the gods awaken, they make the jiva nourished – meaning: fill the jiva with the essential knowledge of the elements. Through this mutual nourishing of one another, the Supreme Greatness that is the Supreme Destiny – meaning: the Destiny to the Self or Liberation – that can be had. Upon having taken recourse in the brahmanadi, while keeping sight locked in Kutastha, one has to do purak-rechak [yogic inhalation-exhalation, respectively] while mentally uttering the mantra of the Self together with prana and going on striking and striking at each lotus. Right upon striking in one location [lotus], staying in the natural course and not trying to have doership over the movement of prana in any way, one has to go beyond that location [that one has just struck]. One must not have even the slightest engagement of desire whatsoever in any of the locations. Start Footnote --  It is the appearance of desire that creates obstacles. Either there is a fall, or one gets stuck there. Progress does not happen. -- End Footnote. Going on doing purak-rechak [see beginning of paragraph] in this way, [this happens:] just as when the vital-air enters the many nadis [subtle pathways], it makes them activated, in the same way, the vaishvanara [fire in the navel area], takes the flow of the elixir falling from the Sahasrar and turns it back upward, goes into the nerves in the spinal column and nourishes and energizes them. And because of that striking taking place at each lotus, the vital-air of space churns and vibrates (just like in chemistry), bringing forth the powers of each of those locations [lotuses]. And the abodes (each of those lotuses with their ruling goddesses) become flooded with beautiful light. This is that which is called “nourishing the gods.” As the darkness disappears from the heart because of that light, the sadhak's “bhoot” [past] (that which has happened) and “bhavishyat” [future] (that which will happen) become visible and go on being seen. And the knowledge of earth, water and such [the elements] is born. This is the nourishing of the creatures or the jiva by the gods. As this nourishing activity goes on happening, the intense light of consciousness of the fully nourished and awakened powers and the jiva's (sadhak's) full knowledge of the elements become one at the end. Then there is the Supreme Realization of Self-Knowledge - “chidanandarupah shivohaṃ” [I am the Consciousness-Bliss Shiva/Blessedness].