#### Prose 

अधश्चोर्ध्वं प्रसृतास्तस्य शाखा
गुणप्रवृद्धा विषयप्रवाला: |
अधश्च मूलान्यनुसन्ततानि
कर्मानुबन्धीनि मनुष्यलोके || 2||
adhaśh chordhvaṁ prasṛitās tasya śhākhā
guṇa-pravṛiddhā viṣhaya-pravālāḥ
adhaśh cha mūlāny anusantatāni
karmānubandhīni manuṣhya-loke

 #### Bengali Translation 

The branches of that samsara-tree are all spread out in the downward and upward directions; they grow due to the three gunas, and the root also grows out in all of the downward directions, and it binds the world of humans in karma [actions and their fruits] (meaning: it is the progenitor of the karmas [acts] of righteousness and unrighteousness).

 #### Commentary 

Those lower branches such as hands, feet etc. that have been spoken about in the previous sloka – these have been spoken about in regards to the powers of doing karmas [actions]. The karmas are of two types – good and bad. The good ones take the way upward and the bad ones take the way downward. Those who take the good way – they, going gradually upward from Muladhar, bring the creation-doing power of this world under their own control, receive unimpeded directives and dress up as Brahmaa [the creator]. The fundamental driving force in this is “yogakanksha” [the longing for yoga]. And those who take the downward direction – they, going downward from the Ajna, become [entities] from humans [down] to inert matter in the downward areas. This becoming – this is due to the power of the three gunas – sattva, rajas and tamas. The foundation of this is “bhogakanksha” [the longing for enjoyments], the fortifying of the embedded desires. The particular worldly experience that is had is according to whichever guna is dominating. Dear sadhak, that sound-touch-sight-taste-smell that you are enjoying outside – these are also “vishaya” [the worldly experience]. And again, when you take recourse in the brahmanadi within the sushumna and go to merge into the guru-substance [or: the great substance] in the Sahasrar – in that brahmanadi too, you have to experience sound-touch-sight-taste-smell. The “vishaya/s” [experience/s] in the brahmanadi, through Brahman-Knowledge, make one be merged in Brahman; and the ones on the outside take recourse in the kinds of atomic substances that bind one to karma [actions and their fruits] and make one experience states of being from the human down to even the lowest hell.