#### Prose 

रजो रागात्मकं विद्धि तृष्णासङ्गसमुद्भवम् |
तन्निबध्नाति कौन्तेय कर्मसङ्गेन देहिनम् || 7||
rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi tṛiṣhṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam
tan nibadhnāti kaunteya karma-saṅgena dehinam

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kaunteya [Arjuna]! Know that rajoguna [alternate spelling of rajas guna] is passion-endowed, and it is the maker of thirst [want] and attachment. It binds the embodied one through attachment to actions.

 #### Commentary 

That from which there is birth/emergence – that is verily rajoguna. “Rajah” [rajas guna] also means the functionality of “coloring” [influence; staining] – like coloring white cloth by dunking it [in dye]. The operation of smearing the Maya-mutation ego in the Pure Brahman and dressing one up as jiva [embodied being] is called “raja” [rajas guna]. This rajoguna is passion-endowed – meaning: full of desirousness. It is from this desirousness that thirst and attachment arise. The craving for an unreceived thing is called “thirst” [want], and having love in the mind for some received thing is called “attachment.” All of these are actions. That by which there is the wish to get something other than “I” – that is that which is called “rajas.” The purport of this wishing is desirousness. The power that that desirousness has is attachment. That attachment is that which makes one submit to enslavement. That enslavement is that which is bondage. That submission bit is action, and the enslavement bit is bondage. It is through rajoguna that the jiva succumbs to the power of desirousness and becomes bound to karma [actions and their fruits].