#### Prose 

अव्यक्तोऽक्षर इत्युक्तस्तमाहु: परमां गतिम् |
यं प्राप्य न निवर्तन्ते तद्धाम परमं मम || 21||
avyakto ’kṣhara ityuktas tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim
yaṁ prāpya na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

 #### Bengali Translation 

Avyakta is actually “Akshara” [Indestructible]. This type of mention has been made. Avyakta-Akshara is called “Parmagati” [Supreme Destination], attaining Which there is no return. That is verily My Supreme Abode.

 #### Commentary 

Prakriti is called “Avyakta.” The last border on the upper side of this Prakriti is the junction of “I” and “you.” The lower side of this junction is “you,” and the upper side is “I”. This is the Akshara-State Itself. Just this much is the beginning of the Supreme Destination. If one attains just this much, one never has to come back to samsara. That is why This is called, “My Supreme Abode.” By getting to this Abode, the sadhak attains the Supreme Destination. That state that is at the upper level of the chitta [personal consciousness], that state that is within the power of Prakriti, that which is called “Akshara avastha” [the state of Akshara] (Chapter 8, sloka 1 [of the Gita]) – in that state, all of the knowledge and the workings of that knowledge of Prakriti – meaning: all of the trickery/illusions of Prakriti are known. And Prakriti Herself, knowing that She cannot bring the sadhak under the power of illusion, stops in shame. Thus, the sadhak no longer looks at returning [to samsara], and takes up the Established Brahman-ness (see Chapter 5, slokas 13-14 [of the Gita]). 