#### Prose 

धूमेनाव्रियते वह्निर्यथादर्शो मलेन च |
यथोल्बेनावृतो गर्भस्तथा तेनेदमावृतम् || 38||
dhūmenāvriyate vahnir yathādarśho malena cha
yatholbenāvṛito garbhas tathā tenedam āvṛitam

 #### Bengali Translation 

As fire remains covered by smoke, as a mirror remains covered by dirt/dust, and as the womb is covered by the amnion – in the same way, the Knowledge of the Self remains covered by desire.

 #### Commentary 

Seeing one's own form and the results of one's doings is the human being's craving or desire. This craving is, whether without wanting or with wanting, at the root of all works. Without it work cannot even begin. But this craving or desire is also at the end of [alternate translation: within] the fulfillment of craving, or it is in the form of veiling, in the path of yoga. “Karma” [spiritual practice], “upasana” [worshipping; reverently experiencing] and “gyana” [knowing; knowledge] – these three states of sadhana – how desire presents itself in the form of “veiling” in these states is being shown via three similes, in order to make that [matter of veiling] easy to understand. First simile: the covering up of fire by smoke. The temperature that grows from the rubbing of two things with each other – that eventually becomes transformed into fire. As fire burns, smoke also appears. It is just like that in sadhana as well. At first, in the state of karma [practice], because of prana stirring up and striking at the sushumna, out of that an energy comes forth and spreads, making the body energized. Via that energy, the intellect also turns inward. Then a kind of light shines forth within. That light is “gyana-jyoti” [light of knowledge]. By the power of that light, like smoke coming  off of wood and such things [burning material], a particular feeling happens throughout the whole body, and the previously done actions – all of their memories rise up in the mind and cover up the inner sky. The light from the fire of knowledge also gets covered up. But just as when a breeze blows upon the fire covered up by the smoke from wood, the smoke moves away and the fire becomes stronger and the light shines forth – in sadhana too, in the same way, if one patiently remains in the steady posture and diligently continues to drive prana with the Atma-mantra, all of those memories of the past, as well as the physical irritations and pains – all disappear. The fire of knowledge becomes stronger and stronger, and the light, now shining forth, illuminates the inner sky. Second simile: the covering of the mirror with dirt/dust. Just as when one breathes on a mirror, the film of the steam that falls [on the mirror] – if either that kind of film or some other kind of heavy dust is on the mirror – then nothing at all is reflected in that mirror. But when the film from that steam dries up, or if the mirror is dusted and wiped clean, then the process of reflection also happens. In the first stage of sadhana, after the inner sky becomes illuminated due to “karma” [practice] in the first stage of sadhana, the second stage of “upasana” [reverently experiencing; worshipping] comes about. At that time, if one steadies the attention at Kutastha, a white [or: bright], tenderly brilliant sphere of light is gradually seen. That is “Chidakash” [sky of consciousness]. Because this sphere is clear, like a mirror, all of everything is reflected in that. But in the beginning it is covered by “kashmal” [see Chapter 2, sloka 2 of the Gita]. Although that kashmal is of many types, in its fundamental and subtle state, it is white like picked cotton or a milk-white cloud. Just as nothing is reflected on the film of steam on a mirror, even though it is shiny, in the same way, even though the covering is white like a milk-white cloud, nothing at all is reflected in that sphere. When, upon the phlegmatic condition drying up in the path of sushumna due to Kriya, when the prana-vayu subtly, yet powerfully, flows and the electric energy grows in the whole body – because of that energy destroying the mind's connections to experiences of the world, all of the masses of kashmal disappear. Then that sphere takes on a very clean and clear form. At that time, an egg-shaped disc is seen within that sphere. That egg-shaped disc is of a shiny, deep and dark black color. But sometimes it is wrapped by a golden filigree, and sometimes it appears completely golden. That black field within that white field looks just like an eye. That is verily the “That” substance - “diveeva chakshurAtatam” [Divine Eye]. Third simile: The covering of the womb by the amnion. Within the womb, the jiva lives in a thin, liquid-filled sac of skin. That sac of skin is called “ulva” or “jivakosha” [sheath of the jiva]. When the jiva stays within that – at that time that form of that sac is just like an egg. For as long as that sac does not break, for that long does the jiva not come out. After it breaks, the jiva no longer stays in the womb; it comes out. The egg-shaped disc that is seen through the sight of consciousness in the light of knowledge in the inner sky – that is verily the “vishvakosha” [sheath of the universe] or – the universe. — Begin Footnote. — In the process of creation in the Manu [Samhita], this is the “sahasrAṃsushmaprabhaṃ haimaṃ anadam.” — End Footnote. — Present within that sheath is the actualized Vedanta, the Supreme Person. That is why the covering is like the amnion. In this third state [of gyana – knowledge or knowing], desire keeps that knowledge-filled sheath covered. For as long as that sheath is not broken through, for that long is He covered within that. Only through Shambhavi can that be broken through.  — Begin Footnote. — For the method of piercing Kutastha, see the commentary on sloka 26 of Chapter 3 [of the Gita]. — End Footnote. — In short: during sadhana, at first, desire keeps the inner light covered up like smoke; then after the light shines forth, it takes a form [kashmal] that is visible to personal consciousness, and by clinging to the body of [spiritual] Consciousness, it keeps the field of Consciousness covered up; and finally, when Consciousness is revealed, [desire] keeps the Supreme Destination – the Supreme Person – covered with an egg-shaped covering. Desire shows itself in these three ways. When these three veilings in the three states are destroyed, then one attains the Supreme Goal.