#### Prose 

द्वाविमौ पुरुषौ लोके क्षरश्चाक्षर एव च |
क्षर: सर्वाणि भूतानि कूटस्थोऽक्षर उच्यते || 16||
dvāv imau puruṣhau loke kṣharaśh chākṣhara eva cha
kṣharaḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni kūṭa-stho ’kṣhara uchyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

“Kshara” [destructible] and “Akshara” [Indestructible] – these two “purushes” [spirits] are well known in the world. It is said that the phenomena and individual beings are “kshara purush” and “Kutastha” is “Akshara Purush.”

 #### Commentary 

It is like: if one person from one family attends an invitation, it is accepted that the family itself has gone there – similarly, placing the title “Purush” on the One and Only Lord Vishnu – if anything in creation (even sticks or stones) is called “purush,” it will not be a lie. It is like the “dhatu” of vedic astrology. In creation, purush is of two types. One type, the phenomena and individual beings from the creator Brahmaa to stones and ultimately to the end of created things – all of this is “kshara” – meaning: perishable purush. And another is the directly experienced “kuta,” the deceptive, illusory mass itself, from which the endless seeds of samasara pour forth – that Maya, the Maya that has benumbed Consciousness/Spirit and has put It in the abyss, yet the knowledge of taking Consciousness/Spirit into the abyss has not arisen in her, and she is existing as salt taken from the sea (it is Maya’s revelatory light but there is nothing operative; that is why Kutastha Purush is knowledge). This type of Maya is actually “Akshara Purush.” (See “Kutastha” in Chapter 8 [of the Pranab Gita].) Even though rays of light pour forth from the sun without stopping, the sun does not diminish. The pouring forth of the seeds of samsara from Maya is like that. These two are the ones that are [together] called “sopadhik purush” [modified purush].