#### Prose 

शुचौ देशे प्रतिष्ठाप्य स्थिरमासनमात्मन: |
नात्युच्छ्रितं नातिनीचं चैलाजिनकुशोत्तरम् || 11||
śhuchau deśhe pratiṣhṭhāpya sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥ
nātyuchchhritaṁ nāti-nīchaṁ chailājina-kuśhottaram

तत्रैकाग्रं मन: कृत्वा यतचित्तेन्द्रियक्रिय: |
उपविश्यासने युञ्ज्याद्योगमात्मविशुद्धये || 12||
tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛitvā yata-chittendriya-kriyaḥ
upaviśhyāsane yuñjyād yogam ātma-viśhuddhaye

 #### Bengali Translation 

In that solitary secret and clean place ([cleaned] via cow-dung9 and such), one has to put down a seat for oneself (to be used regularly). That seat should not be too high or too low. It should not move. First there should be kusha grass, on top of that deerskin (with fur), on top of that a spread woven cloth (uncolored), and one should sit oneself on that. Sitting in this way on the seat, making the mind one-pointed, controlling the chitta [personal consciousness] and the activities of the senses, one should practice yoga in order to purify the self.

 #### Commentary 

“What I am doing, what I am not doing” - so that no one can know about that, one should place one's seat in a secret enough place, a place that is cleaned by products such as cow-dung etc. [see footnote 9 above] (“svastikasana” or “siddhansana” - whatever asana [seated posture] with which one has been able to become an adept, that asana is what one has to use [in the practice]). The seat has to be “chailajinakushottara” - meaning: first kusha grass has to be placed, — Begin Footnote. — The seat should be made of either rope from kusha grass, or a mat of woven kusha grass. It will not do to make the seat with anything other than kusha (like rope from jute, cotton,“shon” etc.). — End Footnote. — then either a deerskin with the fur or a hairy blanket on top of that, and then a “garad,” “tasar” [silks] etc. type of uncolored silk cloth on top of that, and then one has to practice the asana [seated posture] on top of that. This cloth, skin and grass combined seat which should be one's own seat [and no one else's] should not be too high above the ground, and at the same time it should not be on the ground either. It should be at such a height so that no dampness [from the ground can be felt], nor should insects and such be able to jump on to the sadhak. It is enough to have it on top of a dais (approximately 3 poa 1 forearm's height [depending on the interpretation: either 13.5 in/34.29 cm, or 31.5 inches/80 cm]). And more, one has to be practiced enough in the asana that one can sit in the asana in the same way for a long time, [adept enough so] that one does not stir about because of the tensions occurring in the body. And the word “upavishya” [see first line of sloka 6:12 above] means that the asana should not be one of standing, laying etc. The practice of yoga must be done in a seated version of asana. This seated-asana is primarily of two types, “svastikasana” and “siddhasana.” That is explained below. — Begin Footnote. — “Asana” [seated yogic posture] is the third limb of “ashtanga yoga” [eight-limbed yoga]. Although these [asanas] are of many types, “svastikasana” and “siddhasana” - these two types of asanas are primary for the yoga practitioner. They are as follows: (1) “jAnurvorintare samyak kṛtvA pAdatale ubhe; ṛjukAyah samAseenah svastikaṃ tatprachakshate [place both soles of the feet in the same way inside the thighs and knees; sit up straight; this is known as “svastikasana”]. (2) “yonisthAnakamanghrimoolaghatitam kṛtvA dṛDhaṃ vinyaset, meDhre pAdamathaikameva hṛdaye kṛtvA hanuṃ susthiram; sthANuh saṃyamitendriyo'chaladṛshA pashyet bhruvontaraṃ hyetanmokshakapATabheda janakaṃ siddhAsanaṃ prochyate [firmly place the foot at the location of the yoni [perineum]; place the other foot above the penis; steady the jaw towards the heart [center of the chest]; control the senses from movement, and gaze steadily in the middle of the eyebrows; this is called “siddhasana” which opens the doors to Liberation]. — End Footnote. — Practicing yogic posture in the outer way is the external aspect of yoga. But the yogi is not concerned with, and is indifferent to, external space and time.. The body is the yogi's all. The body is itself the yogi's asana. The yogi steadies him/herself in that kind of asana within the body itself! The inner part of the sushumna is verily the yogi's “rahas” - meaning: secret – place. The brahmanadi that is here – that is “mahApAvimochanee mahApuNyamayeenitya” [destroyer of great sins and the bestower of the great beneficence]; therefore, that is verily the clean (sanctified/pure) place. Following the practice taught by guru, and having seated oneself on the external seat according to instructions, one has to place oneself in that pure place within the sushumna, the place which is neither high nor low but in the middle – meaning: at the middle chakra of the seven chakras, at the the Anahata-chakra in the heart-region [in the spinal column between the shoulder blades; see footnote 12 below], and there, one has to (through the drawing of vital-air) relinquish the weight of the downward moving force of the body. This is called “establishing the asana of one's self.” — Begin Footnote. — When the in-breath is completely drawn in and the body is not lax, but firmed or steadied straight with the chest out, the downward force of the body is gathered and held at the heart-lotus. At the time of drawing the air, there should not be any striking of the force of the vital-air on the physical heart or the lungs. The striking of the vital-air should be made at the abode of the vital-air at the Anahata-chakra in the spine (at the heart-lotus). If one is careful in this way and is practicing the teachings of guru, as one continuously and gradually moves the prana in sahaj [natural; easy] Kriya, perfection in yoga ensues. Otherwise there is the possibility of many problems coming about [if the aforementioned care with the vital-air is not taken]. — End Footnote. — Through gradual practice, when there is no more effort needed to hold that force, and the shaking of the body and such also end – that is when that asana is considered to be steadied. And more, it is when there is establishment in the Anahata that that asana becomes “chailAjinakushottara” - meaning: there is settledness on top of cloth, skin and grass. This is because: grass is the “Braahmishakti” - the earth element; Her place is at the Muladhar. Skin is the “Vaishnavishakti”; Her place is at the Svadhisthan. And cloth is “Raudri Shakti”; Her place is at the Manipur. Establishing the Shakti of oneself above all of these at the heart-lotus, the asana of the self becomes “chailAjinakushottara” [situated on top of cloth, skin and grass]. Just as: when one spreads furry skin on top of kusha grass, and places a cloth of silken material on top of that, and then sits in a yogic posture and does Kriya – the electric energy and power that grows in the body upon doing that – the Earth cannot pull that away. [Similarly,] if one is able to hold the force of the body at the Anahata above the Muladhar, Svadhisthan and Manipur, and if one is also able to be established completely there and be still there, the restlessness of the worldly experience cannot attack the mind. Within and without, one must sit in asana as mentioned and make the mind one-pointed – meaning: one has to bring all of the vrittis [functionalities] of the mind together in “one” place. Because the five chakras such as Muladhar are the abodes of the five elements, they are “five.” Only the bindu at the Agya is “one.” By keeping the mind at the “mastak sandhi” [mastak granthi; see Introduction to the Pranab Gita] or the “place of yoga” [or: the place of joining] (see Illustration no. 2 [in the Introduction to the Pranab Gita]) and paying attention with singularity of mind makes the mind one-pointed. When the mind is made one-pointed in that way, the activities of the chitta [personal consciousness] and the senses become drawn inward automatically. They no longer go to the worldly experience.