#### Prose 

इष्टान्भोगान्हि वो देवा दास्यन्ते यज्ञभाविता: |
तैर्दत्तानप्रदायैभ्यो यो भुङ्क्ते स्तेन एव स: || 12||
iṣhṭān bhogān hi vo devā dāsyante yajña-bhāvitāḥ
tair dattān apradāyaibhyo yo bhuṅkte stena eva saḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

When the gods are nourished via yagya [rite], they will bestow beneficent enjoyment on you. One who partakes of their offerings without giving to them – that one is certainly a thief.

 #### Commentary 

“Bhaavan” [nourishing; intaking] is of two types: one is ordinary, that which takes place in a non-sadhana state in all bodies, and the other is methodic, that which happens via sadhana. The statement in the sloka above [3:12] is speaking about this methodic “bhaavan.” Every jiva experiences the fruits of karma. The gods that are established in the abode of the heart are the lords of those karmic fruits. The natural activities of exhalation and inhalation and such – they are actually bound to a supernatural law operated by the gods. Thus, whether the jiva takes up the method or remains under the power of natural activities, because the bodily activities get carried out whether one is willing or unwilling, the nourishing of the gods takes place unknowingly. But that which happens without wanting it to happen because of the jiva being under the powers of natural activities – one cannot get the pure beneficence that is to be enjoyed by that process. -- Start Footnote -- All of the supernatural powers that are attained as a result of sadhana – they are not the pure beneficence that is to be enjoyed. This is because they are impermanent, and if one partakes in them, one has to become tied up in samsara. The Substance that is received, upon not holding on to any of those powers and going beyond the right to experience worldly things – That is verily the pure beneficence that is to be enjoyed. One does not ever have to live separated from That. -- End Footnote. -- This is because due to lack, discontentedness remains. It is to get rid of this discontentedness due to lack that one has to willfully take up the method. When the method is taken up, the giving of the heart and soul and the essence of the body (elixir) takes place with the [act of] offering of prana to each lotus. Because of that, the pure beneficence that is to be enjoyed – the Bliss of Brahman – one gets that very thing. The one who does not take up the method – that one's heart and soul and the elixir within the body become directed towards the worldly experiences – because of oneself being under the power of one's own nature, and thus become eroded moment by moment through the experience of physical pleasures. And this does not nourish the gods. In actuality, the activities of the body are operated and run by the gods such as “vaishvanara” [fire in the navel region] and such, and the currents of prana as well as the elixir are bestowed by them, verily. Thus, all of these [constituents] are their things/property. Therefore, not offering all of those things to the gods via the method, and spending [it all] through the pleasures of the body and the enjoyments of the world is truly being a thief. The sadhana of goodness does not happen in that way.