#### Prose 

अग्निर्ज्योतिरह: शुक्ल: षण्मासा उत्तरायणम् |
तत्र प्रयाता गच्छन्ति ब्रह्म ब्रह्मविदो जना: || 24||
agnir jyotir ahaḥ śhuklaḥ ṣhaṇ-māsā uttarāyaṇam
tatra prayātā gachchhanti brahma brahma-vido janāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The “kaal” [see sloka 8:23] during which the light of the fire is day-bright/white, and during which the “uttarayan shanmasa” [ordinary meaning: six-month northern arc of the sun; see commentary below for spiritual definition] takes place – if the Brahman-knowing persons leave [the body] during that “kaal,” they merge with Brahman.

 #### Commentary 

The seven-flamed fire has seven types of colors. Now, understand how, among those, the color of Emancipation is. Bits of ashes are falling within a mass of fire. In the middle, a coal cracks open and breaks into two [lumps]. The surfaces of both lumps of coal become deep black. Those two black lumps get covered up by a fiery color. All of the blackness is consumed. Gradually, as the heat intensifies, a white light comes forth with a blueness like the inside of the “mosne” flower. That white light with blueness is that which is called “agnijyoti” [the light of the fire; see first line of sloka above]. During a fire ceremony, the rite is successful when this light comes forth. The “ahah” that has been spoken about previously in sloka [8:]18 – this light is that “ahah-light.” And “shukla” (white) [see first line of sloka above] – the mixing of these three brings forth an incredibly beautiful effulgence. At the time of death, pranayam does not have to be done; it happens on its own. That [automatic pranayam] is called “chaturthik pranayam.”9 This chaturthik pranayam’s duration is expansive. At this time, the sadhak should only keep attention on the guru-instructed [inner] location. One does not have to do pranayam; it is happening on its own. When, through the power of [this] pranayam, this light that is the combination of the three colors comes to the place of attention and stands there or reveals itself at that place, at that time, the sadhak will leave life by applying the guru-instructed “thokkar” [strike]. This is the “ShanmAsa” – meaning: half – the Way leading to merging with Brahman, or the Way of no return. This is called “uttarayan” [see first line of sloka above] (“ut” [above] + “tar” [an affix] + “ayan” [refuge; destination]), above which there is no higher destination/way.