#### Prose 

यद्यप्येते न पश्यन्ति लोभोपहतचेतस: |
कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं मित्रद्रोहे च पातकम् || 38||
yady apy ete na paśhyanti lobhopahata-chetasaḥ
kula-kṣhaya-kṛitaṁ doṣhaṁ mitra-drohe cha pātakam

कथं न ज्ञेयमस्माभि: पापादस्मान्निवर्तितुम् |
कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं प्रपश्यद्भिर्जनार्दन || 39||
kathaṁ na jñeyam asmābhiḥ pāpād asmān nivartitum
kula-kṣhaya-kṛitaṁ doṣhaṁ prapaśhyadbhir janārdana

 #### Bengali Translation 

Although these [persons on the side of Dhritarashtra] have lost their perception due to being under the power of greed and cannot see the crime of destroying lineage and causing harm to friends, but – O Janardan! Why should we [persons on the side of the Pandavas] not turn away from this sinful action, as we can see the crime of destroying lineage?

 #### Commentary 

In the 5th sloka of the 6th Chapter, it is written: “Atmaiva hyatmano bandhurAtmaiva ripurAtmanah” - meaning: one is one's own friend; one is one's own enemy. When the person remains a slave to desires in this “kingdom” represented by the body, the person him/herself is sometimes a lustful being, sometimes a bhogi, sometimes even a thief. The person dresses up in these various costumes. At that time, good ways just do not feel good to his/her mind. Even if feelings towards the good come up in the mind, the person finds them intolerable and he/she chases them away. But again, when the person goes on thinking in righteous ways or is engaged in doing righteous work, at that time he/she does not like unrighteous thoughts coming up in the mind. When unrighteous thoughts come up in the mind, the person perceives them as enemies and chases them out of his/her mind. And then again, the person advises him/herself to disengage from unrighteous thoughts and be engaged in good works. One is one's own teacher; one is one's own disciple. This is known just from living as a human being. It is the same in sadhana. The same sadhak is at one time Dhritarashtra, at another time Duryodhana and such people, and at yet another time [the sadhak] dresses up and appears as Bhishma, Drona, Karna etc. as well. Because of being under the power of desires, whatever particular kinds of feelings/thoughts rise up in the mind at particular times, [the sadhak] takes up those particular forms at those times. Then again, when the time comes for destroying desires, or when [the sadhak] makes the effort [to destroy desires] – then as well, whatever particular kinds of feelings/thoughts that arise in the mind at particular times, [the sadhak] him/herself creates a form appropriate to those feelings/thoughts. Because of this, oneself is sometimes lord; sometimes oneself is teacher. Sometimes, by the Full Revelation of the Light of the Self, one merges in Kutastha Chaitanya and even becomes guru to oneself. And then again, one comes down from Kutastha and, becoming the jiva dressed up as Arjuna, engages in enquiry [on Reality]. In short, [it is] the same sadhak; whatever kinds of states that he/she comes to, he/she acts according to those particular states. This “ekal-snede-pana” [self-oriented-ness] is an essential teaching of the Gita.
 
The meaning within these slokas 37 and 38 are exactly like this [as written in the above paragraph]. The sadhak goes on speaking to him/herself, perceiving that one's own adversarial vrittis are imbued with awareness. All of the vrittis have come forth from the same antahkarana; therefore, they all belong to the same “lineage.” All of them have the work of bringing forth the totality of the knowledge of the [phenomenal] universe, from the creator Brahmaa to the finest matter, onto the picture-screen of the chitta. Thus, they are “friends” (doing the same work). The difference [between the two sides of the vrittis] is this: one group is only bringing the Knowledge of Brahman and illuminating the chitta, and another group is only bringing the knowledge of worldly ways and covering the chitta['s perception]. The sadhak, being one of the members of the group that is associated with the Knowledge of Brahman (Arjuna), is saying to his/her own self, having [also] become guru in the form of Kutastha Chaitanya ([saying] to Janardan): “The people of the group associated with worldly ways, because of being under the power of greed, have become murder-conscious. If this war begins, that there will be destruction for both sides and therefore there will be the sin of destroying lineage and the sin of killing friends – they [vrittis of worldly ways] cannot see this. Nevertheless, why should we, who know [about incurring this sin] very well, not turn away from this sin?”