#### Prose 

इन्द्रियस्येन्द्रियस्यार्थे रागद्वेषौ व्यवस्थितौ |
तयोर्न वशमागच्छेत्तौ ह्यस्य परिपन्थिनौ || 34||
indriyasyendriyasyārthe rāga-dveṣhau vyavasthitau
tayor na vaśham āgachchhet tau hyasya paripanthinau

 #### Bengali Translation 

Within the essential aspects of sound, touch and such [the senses], there is attraction (affection) and repulsion in each of the senses. Do not fall under the powers of those attractions and repulsions. This is because attraction and repulsion are obstructors or obstacles for the spiritual aspirant.

 #### Commentary 

In the early stages, Kriya does not always happen with the same kind of ease [all the time]. Even if it happens some days, the “shravana” [hearing], “manana” [contemplating], “kirtan” [praise], “darshan” [witnessing revelations] and such do not happen at all. And some days, one of them happens, and another does not happen. When this kind of thing takes place, attraction and repulsion come into being – meaning: if Kriya goes well, then there is affection towards Kriya; and if Kriya does not go well, then there is disdain towards Kriya. But if one falls in this kind of way to the powers of attraction and repulsion, Prakriti cannot be brought under control. And if that does not happen [if Prakriti is not brought under control], Liberation also does not happen. Instead of being pleased or displeased with ease or unease [respectively], the positive feeling of goodness about oneself that comes about from doing one's duty – if one just holds on to that and relies on Srigurudev, never will the Prakritic restlessness or the effects of vata, pitta, kapha [humors of the body] or any other obstacles be able to obstruct.