#### Prose 

अस्माकं तु विशिष्टा ये तान्निबोध द्विजोत्तम |
नायका मम सैन्यस्य संज्ञार्थं तान्ब्रवीमि ते || 7||
asmākaṁ tu viśhiṣhṭā ye tānnibodha dwijottama
nāyakā mama sainyasya sanjñārthaṁ tānbravīmi te

 #### Bengali Translation 

O most superior of the twice-born! Those who have primacy among our group, and the director of my soldiers – [now] know them. I am telling you their names so that you may know.

 #### Commentary 

Dronacharya is being addressed as “dvijottama” [most superior of the twice-born] as he is “dvija” [twice-born] because he is the thinking that has come about due to samskaras. “JanmanA jAyate shudrah saṃskArAdvija ucchyate” [at birth, one is a shudra [lowest of the four castes]; by attaining attributes one becomes a dvija [twice-born; or: of an upper caste]]; “vedapAThee bhavedvipro brahma jAnAti brahma jAnAti brAhmaNah” [one who studies the Vedas is a “vipra” and the one who knows Brahman is a brahmin].
 
Being a brahmin and knowing the four Vedas, and [at the same time] taking up the path of Kshatriyas and becoming a master of the martial arts [reflects] the superior nature of Drona. The samskaric intellect does both: it enjoys the Bliss of Brahman and, at the same time, bound by samskaras [of the person and the culture], it is ready to protect the sacredness of knowledge and destroy its corruption/corruptors. This is why this intellect is superior.
 
Drona became the disciple of Parashurama and learned all of the martial arts, and later, as a master of martial arts, became the military-guru of both of the Kuru and Pandava sides. “Kuru” means “karma,” or the path of “bhoga” [worldly partaking], and “Pandava” means “jnana” [knowledge], or the path of “yoga.”  -7-
 
The human being's thinking is carried out due to two types of samskaras: 1) the karma-samskaras remaining at the time of death in the previous life/lives – meaning: by “daiva” [subtle currents of fate due to actions in past lives], or [what is also called] “prarabdha karma” [karma accumulated from previous lives], and 2) the karma-samskaras of this life intended to attain “dvija” [a higher standing] – meaning: by the “purushkara[s] karma” [acts that bring about uplifting samskaras through self-effort]. In the way that a gramophone disc is restricted to [playing or sounding] that which is recorded [on it], or the music that has been “written” upon it – in that same way, the human body is bound to the daiva or prarabdha karmas as if they are written upon it. The human being is bound to act according to those [samskaras born of those karmas]. The pleasures and pains that are written in the human being's book of fate – he/she has to experience that. Without experiencing them they do not diminish [or: end]. This very thing is [the human being's] “bhoga” [partaking]. And [conversely,] with the karma-samskaras that help one attain “dvijatva” [being twice-born; or: a higher station in consciousness than at birth], [meaning] the purushkaras, one's mind – independently [regardless of prarabdha] – endeavors towards the attainment of the Knowledge of the Self, and goes on progressing towards the abode of Knowledge. This is one's yoga. During this progression, even if predestined fate blocks [the sadhak] and keeps him stuck to the prarabdha karma that is surrounding him/her with delusion, because of the fruits attained through purushkaras and reaching the state of “dvija,” one's attention remains locked in the direction of spiritual Knowledge; it [the drive for Knowledge] does not get lost. Eventually, that [drive for Knowledge] becomes extremely intense and becomes directed towards the annihilation of [the sadhak's] prarabdha.  That is why, historically, Drona – representing the samskaric intellect – even though he was bound by the delusion caused by the powers of previous daiva samskaras or prarabdha karma and took the side of the Kauravas, or was bound to bhoga – because of the samskaras of his being “twice-born,” due to the fruit of his purushkaras, his attention remained steadily in the direction of the Panadava side – or the side of yoga. Because of this reason, his body, which is the manifestation of the prarabdha karma samskaras, came to its destruction via the knowledge attained from his purushkaras – meaning: in the hands of two disciples named Arjuna and Dhrishtadyumna. Arjuna, cut the “delusion-bowstring” (gunas) of Drona's “body-bow,” via his “arrow” – meaning: discrimination – by which [Drona's] seven palates were pierced, and right after that, Dhrishtadyumna, with his “scimitar,” or Knowledge, decapitated [Drona].