#### Prose 

क्लैब्यं मा स्म गम: पार्थ नैतत्त्वय्युपपद्यते |
क्षुद्रं हृदयदौर्बल्यं त्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परन्तप || 3||
klaibyaṁ mā sma gamaḥ pārtha naitat tvayyupapadyate
kṣhudraṁ hṛidaya-daurbalyaṁ tyaktvottiṣhṭha parantapa

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha [Arjuna]! Do not take up the ways of a “kleeba” [eunuch; neuter]. It does not dignify you. O Parantapa [Arjuna], abandon such petty weakness of heart and rise up.

 #### Commentary 

And more, you are the son of Pritha. Your mother is Pritha (“pritha” - throwing; the power of throwing is the mother of the sadhana-life of the sadhak). By the strength of the self-generated power of distinguishing between the gunas and actions, [Pritha – the mother of Arjuna] continuously and always abandoned past conditions because of her own wishes and because of the wishes of others. She even left Shurasena – the giver of her own birth [her birth-father] – and had to become the daughter of Kuntibhoja. That quality of your mother is active in you. So, if you too wish, you can use the strength from that power within you and abandon the Mayic way and take on the Brahman-way. So I am saying: do not take up this kind of “klaibya” [neutered person] quality. “Klaibya” means feeling like a eunuch. It is like the way a “kleeba” (eunuch) is – having neither female-ness nor male-ness, and just going on experiencing only the samsara-suffering. In the same way, in the path of sadhana, one who succumbs to the pull of Maya and loses the masculine principle, that sadhak cannot penetrate above, and because of being under the influence of hope [for Liberation], cannot relax and receive either. That sadhak only experiences the suffering of sadhana. You are “Parantapa” (one who can energize the power of the beyond – meaning: one who has the capability to use the arresting power of Prakriti [Nature]) – meaning: one who is adept at stopping the natural restlessness via subtle pranayam and able to be established in yoga. This kind of neuter-ness (lack of the masculine principle) does not become you. Abandon this petty weakness and be “ut” “tiShTha” (established above). [See sloka in Sanskrit above for the full [compound] word “uttiShTha” stated there.] Among the “da”, “ya”, “pa” and “u” - these four stations1 – at the time of sadhana one has to be settled in the “pa” station and pierce the Kutastha by the use of Shambhavi mudra. This “pa” is below the Ajna and above the Vishuddha, situated at the place where the head and the neck join. Because [this station] is above the five elements, it is called “ut” (above). Turning the tongue backwards, pulling the chin so that it touches the thorax of the throat, sitting with the chest thrust forward, and keeping the spinal column, neck and head aligned straight, and keeping head and neck area taut makes the “pa” and the Ajna chakra – these two stations – line up “on the same thread” [on the same line]. This state of “being on the same thread” is what is called the state of “kapidhvaja” (see the commentary on sloka 20 of Chapter 1). When Mayic worldly matters come to the mind, the two stations [“pa” and Ajna-chakra] no longer remain “on the same thread”; “pa” lowers down a bit, and the Ajna-chakra goes up a bit. This state is what is called “sitting on the chariot.” In order to destroy the seed of samsara, one has to abandon timidity and be on that “same thread.” Then, immediately upon applying Shambhavi mudra, the “kuta” gets pierced; the seed [of samsara] gets buried by the strike of extremely subtle prana and never sprouts again – meaning: through the “thoka” [strike] of breath, the mind dies and Chaitanya Samadhi is attained.