#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव क्षेत्रं क्षेत्रज्ञमेव च |
एतद्वेदितुमिच्छामि ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं च केशव || 1||* 1
arjuna uvācha
prakṛitiṁ puruṣhaṁ chaiva kṣhetraṁ kṣhetra-jñam eva cha
etad veditum ichchhāmi jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ cha keśhava

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said: “O Keshava [Sri Krishna]! Prakriti and Purush, the field and the knower of the field, knowledge and the knower of knowledge – I wish to know about these.”

 #### Commentary 

The sadhak is observing: this effort of the self to unite with the Self, which I have understood to be “bhakti-yoga” – in this, there are vrittis [active properties] that are standing there, some of which are adversarial, and some of which are supportive. But the foundation of both of the adversarial and supportive vrittis is the same. For as long as the root of that foundation is not destroyed – for that long, it is hopeless to attain any permanent fruit from the union of the self with the Self. That foundation, which is the power in all things – that foundation too is founded on something else. Even though She is the all-doing Shakti [power], She keeps Herself present [fully evident] while [at the same time] admitting to being under the power of a certain Truth [not necessarily evident]. There is no kind of atom of subatomic particle [created and controlled by] this Mahashakti [great power] that does not have this Truth stealthily hidden in it (like the space that is within a brick, stone, vessel or lamp [and such]). This Truth, with Its hidden way of being, is the Lord of the Consciousness of that Mahashakti. These two supremely venerable spiritual aspects are standing in front of me in the same kind of way. Who among these is Prakriti, and who is Purush? Furthermore, what is the field? And who is the knower of the field? That by which the field and the knower of the field are known – what exactly is that knowledge/wisdom? And again, the thing that is to be known – what actually is that? O Keshava! Now explain these very things to me.