#### Prose 

दैवी ह्येषा गुणमयी मम माया दुरत्यया |
मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते मायामेतां तरन्ति ते || 14||
daivī hyeṣhā guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā
mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te

 #### Bengali Translation 

This guna-endowed Maya [Illusion] of mine, this “daivi” [divine] Maya is very difficult to pierce. But those who meditate only on Me – they are able to cross beyond this Maya.

 #### Commentary 

Because Maya [Illusion] is the aggregate of sattva, rajas, tamas – these three gunas – She is called “gunamayi” [endowed with gunas]; and because She exists as the Manifesting Nature of the Lord, She is “daivi” [Divine]. It is an extremely distant dream indeed to even think about crossing beyond this Maya – meaning: one cannot go beyond Her by just making the effort to go beyond. That is why She is “dustara” [on a distant level]. This is because Maya is such a thing that the more one tries to break the bonds of illusion, the more one becomes entangled. (It is like mentally trying to tie and then untie knots in the sky.) No escape is at all possible. This is well known. This is the warning given in the Shakti-oriented scriptures such as “Chandi” etc. Actually, one has to let go of all effort; one should not make any effort at all to defeat Maya's attacks. Let Maya do whatever She does. Far be it to even speak about being deluded by Her, one should not even pay the slightest bit of attention to Her; one should be wholly engaged – with the entire antahkarana – to the service of the Self – meaning: taking up the Atma-mantra, pursue only the Self. One must not make any effort to subdue Prakriti (or Maya). When this approach [of only practicing yoga for the Self alone] is taken, Maya automatically becomes powerless. Transcending Maya happens as an inevitable event. Then one can know the Self that is beyond the gunas and is Inexhaustible. And one never again has to be bound by Maya.