#### Prose 

पत्रं पुष्पं फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति |
तदहं भक्त्युपहृतमश्नामि प्रयतात्मन: || 26||
patraṁ puṣhpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayachchhati
tadahaṁ bhaktyupahṛitam aśhnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

One who offers Me “patra” [leaf], “pushpa” [flower], “phal” [fruit], and/or “jal” [water], I accept/welcome that pure-hearted person’s devotion-filled offerings of leaf and such.

 #### Commentary 

“Patra” [leaf] = Veda. Leaves give shade, standing in which there is relief from the torment of heat. Similarly, knowledge comes forth in Veda, the knowledge that gives relief from the torment of the world. That is why Veda represents the leaves of the samsara-tree.
 
“Pushpa” [flower] = the teachings of guru. The most excellent part of the tree is the flower. Similarly, the most excellent part of having this body is guru’s teaching[s], by which the pressures of embodiment are destroyed, and thereby the love for the Self arises.
 
“Phal” [fruit] = the attainment of success from guru’s teachings.
 
“Jal” [water] = the power to receive/apply guru’s teachings. It is by this very power that the full benefit of those leaves, flowers and fruits are realized.
 
The pure person who, with unwavering belief in guru’s words, offers the aforementioned leaves, flowers, fruits and water into the “I” – gives it into the “I” – that offering unfailingly makes one attain “I”.
 
This offering about which it has been now spoken – this is a matter of the inner – the fruit of inner sadhana [spiritual practice]. In order to have the right to do this offering, external sadhana is necessary. Without removing the dirt from the mind and without removing the mind’s doubts through external sadhana, the right to do inner sadhana does not come about. Thus, now the external version of this sloka is being addressed, and the matter of external sadhana is being explained.
 
When the human being first enters the world of living beings, at that time, the person is given two living deities who are reservoirs of kindness and springs of affection. One is the mother, and the other is the father. Through the aid of these two deities’ bodies, minds, wealth and lives, that helpless and powerless infant-body gradually grows into a human being. Those deities that gave all that they had to make this person into such a grown-up – if that person, due to bad actions and sinful connections, is not able to worship those deities with his/her body, mind, wealth and life, then whether you want to talk about gods, or yagas and yajnas [rituals], or yoga-samadhi – nothing can give good fruits. This is because that person has not learned to merge heart and life into the life/heart [of another]. The one who does not have devotion, reverence and heartfelt love for mother and father – that person cannot have any right to any spiritual work. The person who – after getting everything that one needs to learn from this world from these selfless, kind-hearted ones – behaves badly towards them – no humanity remains in that person. One who does not have humanity – that person cannot know “manodharma” [inner righteousness]. One who does not know inner righteousness – that person does not have the power to know “I”. This is because it is “I” Itself that is the nurturer of the world in the form of father and mother. That is why it is imperative that devotion begins here [with parents]. But the grateful, devoted and reverent person who knows the divinity of these deities – that great person can know what the fruit of unwavering belief in guru’s words is. If one goes past all obstacles and becomes dutifully engaged in the practice of the teachings of guru, then what is not possible to do with forbearance, which is the great accomplishment? These deities [parents] – in order to worship them, it is necessary to use (in order to bring nourishment that is appropriate for the carrying on of the body) leaves, flowers, fruits and water. If, in order to please the parents, one gives with devotion leaves, flowers, fruits and water – that becomes an offering to the Supreme Father, Supreme God, Parabrahman. It is through satisfying the parents that the dirt of the mind is removed; doubt is removed. Thereafter, one also obtains the right to enter within. 