#### Prose 

सहयज्ञा: प्रजा: सृष्ट्वा पुरोवाच प्रजापति: |
अनेन प्रसविष्यध्वमेष वोऽस्त्विष्टकामधुक् || 10||
saha-yajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛiṣhṭvā purovācha prajāpatiḥ
anena prasaviṣhyadhvam eṣha vo ’stviṣhṭa-kāma-dhuk

 #### Bengali Translation 

At the beginning of creation, Prajapati [a deity – lord of creatures/lord of subjects] created the subjects [created beings] with yagya and said, “May you, step by step, attain the heights of the Self. Let this bring about the bestowing of the beneficent fruits.”

 #### Commentary 

During the time when the [sperm] from the body of the father travels into the womb of the mother, the prana of the father spreads [in the womb]. With the mixing together of that prana with the prana of the mother, the prana-flow [for the new body] begins. At this time, in the form of a particle subtler than all particles (as small as that) in the microcosm of the body, the seven heavens are formed. In those seven abodes, Mahamaya (“Jagaddhatri” [Goddess Who is the foundation of the world) appearing in the form of Life, activates the supernatural powers that are ascribed to the seven abodes through Her Power. Because of this the seven elements expand; by which, the sheath of the body continues to grow. This is why the creature is [said to be] “with yagya.” There are two “Prajapati[s]” [see the Bengali translation section above] [as the title] pertains to human existence. The first is the giver of the first birth, and another is the giver of the second birth. The giver of the first birth are parents. The giver of the second birth is guru. Both of these two declare: “anena prasaviShyadhvam” [by this, may you bring forth; see sloka 10 above for the Sanskrit occurrence] etc. Because the parents' “declaring” is within the “Adi icchAshakti” [power of primal desire], it [the declaring] remains unrevealed. Because the guru's “declaring” is within teachings, it [the declaring] is revealed. Srigurudev gives the disciple the right to enter the inner world from outside and gives [the disciple] the second birth. At that time, upon showing the disciple the “sahaj” [easy/simple/natural] yagya of prana and showing the disciple the method of applying the technique, He says, “It is by this that there is attainment of the heights. It is by this that the beneficent fruits are had.”