#### Prose 

अजोऽपि सन्नव्ययात्मा भूतानामीश्वरोऽपि सन् |
प्रकृतिं स्वामधिष्ठाय सम्भवाम्यात्ममायया || 6||
ajo ’pi sannavyayātmā bhūtānām īśhvaro ’pi san
prakṛitiṁ svām adhiṣhṭhāya sambhavāmyātma-māyayā

 #### Bengali Translation 

I am without birth. My Being is Immortal. And although I am the Lord of all beings/phenomena, through the Power of the Creative Potentiality of My Own Self, I am with all beings/phenomena through My Own Maya.

 #### Commentary 

During the practice of Kriyayoga, after merging in Pure Consciousness in the equipoise of samadhi, and then coming back to mental life because of “vikarma” [karma which returns one to the world-consciousness], and thereafter opening up the eye of insight, the sadhak sees that the one “I” is verily present everywhere and always. There is no place for the “I” to come and go, and therefore, the “I” has no birth. If there is no birth, there is no death either. Thus, the “I” is “avyayatma” - meaning: the “akshaya” [Indestructible] Being. Whatever is destructible is of the twenty-four substances such as the chitta, or of the phenomena. These phenomena, such as chitta etc., are all situated in the “I” Itself. Their existence is in the “I”. Therefore, this “I” is verily their Ishvara [God] – meaning: the bestower of existence. But for the different forms of the “I” that appears – the Atma-Maya is the cause of that, and its own Nature/Prakriti is its mechanism. As the Consciousness-Reality pervades all, such as: in “Chit” [see following paragraph for definition], chitta [personal consciousness], ego, intellect, mind etc. - in whichever particular place It is and in whichever particular way It exists there – being with Maya, It takes on the form according to that place and that way. That is why It appears in many types of forms such as “manomaya,” “chittamaya,” “chinmaya” [these are different levels of consciousness] etc. All of these are born of Its own Nature/Prakriti. In Yoga Vashishtha [a spiritual treatise] it is written that, “That by which the efforts of the Effort-free Brahman are accomplished and, at the same time, by which the emerging of higher consciousness of the jiva takes place is called “Chit.” Chit is “Avyakta” [Inexpressible]. This Avyakta Chit is, verily, Maya. Maya, upon first becoming manifest from the merged state, and then taking on physicality via mutation, becomes transformed into the Prakriti endowed with the twenty-four substances. When the Light of Consciousness falls on this Prakriti, That, through Maya, reflects Itself in many forms according to the different places of appearance. Just as, in the direction of creation, the One Consciousness/Spirit becomes transformed into “many-ness” through the gradual manifestations of the coverings, similarly, in the direction of merging, with the coverings gradually being destroyed due to involution, Its “many-ness” is destroyed. At that time, the sadhak, goes on seeing the forms of the different “avatars” [incarnations of God] in the different coverings, and then merges within and attains Brahman-ness.