#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
लोकेऽस्मिन्द्विविधा निष्ठा पुरा प्रोक्ता मयानघ |
ज्ञानयोगेन साङ्ख्यानां कर्मयोगेन योगिनाम् ||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
loke ’smin dvi-vidhā niṣhṭhā purā proktā mayānagha
jñāna-yogena sāṅkhyānāṁ karma-yogena yoginām

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said, “O Anagha [blameless one; Arjuna]! I have told you previously that there are two types of “nishtha” [steadied abidance in something] on this plane of existence: the “nishtha” of gyana-yoga by those on the side of Sankhya, and the “nishtha” of karma-yoga by those on the side of the yogis.  -3-

 #### Commentary 

The certain steadiness that is full of devotion and reverence, the kind of steady state, which, when it comes about, makes the body motionless, when the antahkarana [aggregate of inner operators of personal consciousness] becomes pointed toward the inner world and goes beyond the bindu, sound and attributes – it is that which is called “nishtha” [steadied abidances]! In the physical world, that nishtha is of two types: one – the Sankhya's – meaning: gyani's – they [attain that nishtha] via gyana-yoga, and those who are yogis – meaning: “karmis” [performers of action] – they attain that nishtha via karma-yoga. In the body, prana is the power of movement, and mind is the power of consciousness. Putting mind in that prana is called “karma-yoga,” and putting mind in mind is called “gyana-yoga.” By applying the instructions of guru, and placing the mantra of the Self together with “hangsa” in a precise way on the six chakras in the path of sushumna is putting the mind on prana. And aiming towards the state of stillness at the Sahasrar, which is above the Agya, via “shravana-manana-nididhyasana” [hearing, contemplating, being absorbed], and going on to ascertain the knowledge of spiritual things is putting mind in mind. The result of the precise offering of mantra is: becoming support-free and merging as one in the Sky of Brahman. And the final result of ascertaining the knowledge of spiritual things is the dissolution of the mind and becoming Still in the Vishnu-ness. These two are verily the same; the difference is only in the way they appear to be. In Chapter 2 [of the Gita], from sloka 20 to sloka 38,  gyana-nishtha [abidance through awareness], and from sloka 40 to sloka 53, karma-nishtha [abidance through the act of yoga] have been explained. That is why the Lord said, “Pura prokta” [taught as a complete whole; alternate translation: taught since ancient times]. Because the sadhak, having received the teachings of Sankhya, is no longer falling into the restlessness of the outer experiences and has become fit to receive the Knowledge of Brahman. That is why he [Arjuna] is being called “anagha” [blameless] – meaning: sinless – in this sloka.