#### Prose 

उच्चै:श्रवसमश्वानां विद्धि माममृतोद्भवम् |
ऐरावतं गजेन्द्राणां नराणां च नराधिपम् || 27||
uchchaiḥśhravasam aśhvānāṁ viddhi mām amṛitodbhavam
airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ narāṇāṁ cha narādhipam

 #### Bengali Translation 

Among “ashvas” [horses], know Me to be “Amritotbhav ucchaishravA.” Among “gajendras” [elephants], [I am] “Airavat,” and know Me to be “Nara” among “manushyas” [humans].

 #### Commentary 

When the sadhak travels according to instructions within the brahmanadi in the sushumna (that brahmanadi is that which is called “ksheersamudra” [sea of sweet milk]) – this action is that which is called “traveling the sea.” As Kriya is practiced continuously, these seven primary “vayus” [vital-airs] arise: “pravaha,” “sangvaha,” “vivaha,” “udvaha,” “aavaha,” “parivaha” and “paraavaha.” Among these, “sangvaha” is related to “apana,” “vivaha” to “samana,” “udvaha” to “vyana,” “aavaha” to “udana,” and “parivaha” to “prana.” The work of “prana” is to preserve the body from within the body, and the work of “apana” is to expel “prana” from the body. At all times, there is this fight between the two vayus. The rubbing together [of prana and apana] that happens at the time of Kriya is of a special type. The seven [aforementioned] vayus are in the form of “shakti” [creative and active power] in each of the petals of each of the lotuses. There are seven [other] “matrika shaktis” from the Muladhar to the Sahasrar that keep those vayus integrated and in harmony, which, respectively, are: “Keerti,” “Shri,” “Vak,” “Smriti,” “Medha,” “Vriti” and “Kshama.” When, during the performance of Kriya, the vital-air from the space outside comes into the body – at that time, “Keerti” goes on rising from the Muladhar, and “Kshama” goes on descending from the Sahasrar. Due to the moving back and forth of these two shaktis – which are located at the two ends [of the aggregate of seven], the shaktis in the middle go through a transformation in their states. As soon as there is the rising up [of spiritual attention] to the place of “Kshama,” right then, the work of “Keerti” disappears. And as “Kshama” comes to the place of “Keerti,” it immediately spreads its “Kshama-ness” everywhere. The way that the shaktis in the middle were previously operating (all of their activities were directed towards creation) – all of the operations of all of those shaktis – as well – turn around – meaning: they become Brahman-facing. For this reason, each of the vayus in all of the petals of the six lotuses turn around, and go on directing each of their powers in the non-samsaric path. Within this aggregate of these shaktis, 14 types of sounds/tones come forth. All of these tones can be heard in the upper regions. And they are continuous, never-ending and unbroken. That is why the name is “ucchaivashravasam.” [heard together in the upper place]. And because this endless, unbroken-ness is established in “I”, “I” am “ucchashrava.” “Ucchaishrava” is the greatest of the “ashvas.” What is “ashva” [traditional meaning: horse]? “Ashva” is that which takes someone/something on its back and goes about – meaning: a weight-bearing animal. The vayus within the body that take the mind upon their backs and bring it outside through exhalation and make it gather up the experiences of sound-touch-sight-taste-smell, and again through inhalation carry those experiences into the body and make one experience them in the “manomaya kosha” [mental sheath] – those two vayus in the forms of exhalation and inhalation are called “ashva” [bearing mind on their backs]. Among them, the vayu that takes the mind through the “naad” [inner sound] and through the “jyoti” [inner light] and has one realize That Vishnu – that is the one that is “ucchashraivas,” which has been previously mentioned.
 
Separation/broken-ness is death; only the unbroken-ness bit is “amrita” [immortality; nectar of immortality]. Because this state is realized from the unbroken sound, “ucchashraivas” is said to come forth from “amrita” [nectar] (“amritodbhava” [coming forth from “amrita” [nectar]; see Bengali translation above for occurrence of the term in a slightly different form]. This is because during this state, the ambrosia dropping from the Sahasrar endlessly consecrates Kshama at the Muladhar. And because the direction of that “amrita” has turned back, it never ends. In this state that is devoid of the ending of the flow of nectar, that tone can be heard. This state is the operation of Shakti-Agni (there are no outward directed vrittis [functionalities]). That is why “Ucchashraiva” is said to be the Indra’s [the lord of fire’s] ride/mount.
 
airAvataṃ gajendraNAm [among “gajendras” [great elephants] I am “Airavat”] – “airavat” (ira = water; and “vat” = similar to) – it is like water, but not water – something that completely satisfies intense thirst. “Gaja” is the name of one who melts with the pleasure of touch, one who loses oneself in the pleasure of touch. And “indra” means the “highest” [of a particular group] – meaning: the one who loses oneself in the pleasure of pure touch and experiences the full satisfaction of the quenching of all of the worldly thirsts – that is the one who is “gajendra” [king of the “gajas”] (Airavat). Now, dear sadhak, check this against your own experience. When you go to pierce the Anahata (the place of attachment) after having pierced the eight-aspected place from the Manipur – at that time, you become so intoxicated, and you so lose yourself due to the pleasure of touch, that all the hairs on your body stand on end. A shivering comes to your body. It is not cold, yet there is shivering. Such is this kind of shivering that no matter what you try, you cannot stop/quench it. All of your external body, from the feet to the head, shake. At this time, in your heart and in your head, such a cooling touch is experienced that it gives you all satisfaction. There are no worldly experiences; there are no enjoyments left; there is nothing left to attain/have. Yet, as you continually keep on attaining all that is to be attained, you go above and merge. At that time, whether outside or within, there is no kind of sense of either’s existence [no sense of outer and inner]. During this state, there is the witnessing of a white elephant on the east side of Kutastha. That is “Airavat.” This state is not different from “I”. Therefore, “I” am “Airavat” among “gajendras.”
 
NarAnAṃcha narAdhipam – among the “naras,” I am “Naradhip” [king of the “naras”]; “nara” – “n” means taking and getting; “a” is a letter of negation – the state in which there is no taking and getting – that is the state of “nara.” Taking and getting are of the worldly experience. The worldly experience exists up to the Vishuddha-lotus. When one goes above the worldly experience (goes up to the Ajna-chakra), one is bestowed the right of self-improvement. The one for whom the right to improve oneself has come about – that one is called “nara.” As well, if one does not come back down after getting up to the Ajna-chakra, one can become “adhip” (king). This is because at this place, there can be both self-improvement and, at the same time, one can also rule over the worldly experience below as well. It is from abiding in this place that one witnesses the Supreme Person Vishnu and one attains His qualities. The one who rules – that one is called “king.” Lord Vishnu rules this creation (the place of experiencing the worldly matters). Yet, because He is not connected to them, He remains as the Lord of yoga/Lord of yogis. That is why I am saying that among “naras,” “I” am the highest of the “naras” – their King; and That Vishnu is “I”. 