#### Prose 

ये हि संस्पर्शजा भोगा दु:खयोनय एव ते |
आद्यन्तवन्त: कौन्तेय न तेषु रमते बुध: || 22||
ye hi sansparśha-jā bhogā duḥkha-yonaya eva te
ādyantavantaḥ kaunteya na teṣhu ramate budhaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

All of the enjoyments/partakings of the worldly experience that have emerged from the contact with the senses – they are all causes of sorrow/pain, and have beginnings and ends ([are] impermanent). O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! That is why the discriminating person does not become addicted to all such enjoyments/partakings.

 #### Commentary 

Sound, touch, sight, taste, smell – these five matters of the worldly experience – all of these are experienced by eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin – these five sense-organs. Each of the senses have a limit in regards to the capacity of how much of the enjoyment of the worldly experience they can have. As soon as that limit is crossed, then there is no pleasure from that [experience] any more; pain comes forth. It is like: when the mouth has had enough of eating “sandesh” [a sweetmeat], one cannot eat any more “sandesh”; indigestion happens; headache ensues; one suffers. That is how it goes. In creation, this is a fixed process! That is why it is being said that the pleasures from the enjoyment of worldly experiences are by nature of short duration and, in the end, bring about pain. And more, when one is addicted to the enjoyment of worldly experiences, the spiritual strength of the mind (to rise in the direction of the Self) becomes powerless – meaning: the power by which the Supreme Self can be experienced, that power diminishes; the inner sky becomes covered. But the happiness that comes forth within after disengaging from the enjoyments of external worldly experiences – that has no end. Even if that happiness is enjoyed for infinity, no aberration happens to that. It is for this reason that the discriminating person does not become addicted to the pleasures of the worldly experience.