#### Prose 

पुरुष: स पर: पार्थ भक्त्या लभ्यस्त्वनन्यया |
यस्यान्त:स्थानि भूतानि येन सर्वमिदं ततम् || 22||
puruṣhaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha bhaktyā labhyas tvananyayā
yasyāntaḥ-sthāni bhūtāni yena sarvam idaṁ tatam

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha [Arjuna]! The One in Whom all living beings and phenomena exist, the One by Whom all of creation exists – that Purush [Being] is verily “Para” (Highest), and only by devotion is He attained. 

 #### Commentary 

Now this time, sadhak, take a look. This “Purush” [Being] – “pur” is you and “shuye” [in repose] is “I”. It is He [“I”] Who is beyond everything. There is nothing at all beyond Him. Your existence is up to the point of breath/breathing. Right above this breath is “I”. It is said, “For as long as there is breath, for that long is there desire/hoping.” Right when breath finished – meaning: the breath of the inner remained within, and the breath of the outer remained outside – the desiring/hoping also ended/became satisfied. Right then, I became “I”. “I” is “Purush.” With devotion that goes to nothing else, one can become “I”. The unwavering faith in guru’s words is called “bhakti” [devotion]. This space-sewing – this does not happen without unwavering faith in guru’s words. Now see rightly. Just below this “I” is the beginning of Prakriti. That is why [there is the statement] “antahsthAni bhootAni” [at the end of the Place is the beginning of creation; see first line of sloka above]. And just above Prakriti is the beginning of “I”. This “bhoota” [creation] and “tat” [That] become One. Those that are called “bhoota” and “tat” that you are seeing – witness and realize it all, and have Peace.