#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
पश्यामि देवांस्तव देव देहे
सर्वांस्तथा भूतविशेषसङ्घान् |
ब्रह्माणमीशं कमलासनस्थ-
मृषींश्च सर्वानुरगांश्च दिव्यान् || 15||
arjuna uvācha
paśhyāmi devāns tava deva dehe
sarvāns tathā bhūta-viśheṣha-saṅghān
brahmāṇam īśhaṁ kamalāsana-stham
ṛiṣhīnśh cha sarvān uragānśh cha divyān

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said: “O Lord! I see in Your Body all gods, all of the kinds of living beings and phenomena such as mammals etc., divine sages, all of the serpents and the lord of creation Brahmaa seated on a lotus-dais.”

 #### Commentary 

Now, with the functionality of seeing in the direction of Brahman being active, the sadhak is witnessing within his own body the Cosmic Form. Without being a seer, one cannot see that which is to be seen. Dressing up oneself as the “seer,” making the cosmos into “you” and the “seen,” the sadhak, forgetting the Selfness of the Self, is overcome by the Cosmic Form, and is saying, “O Lord! In Your Divine Body – it is all the Grand Sport of Space. Scent from earth, taste from water, sight from fire, touch from air and sound from space are becoming the five causes in Space and only Space. The causal effects of the mixing of the three gunas – sattva, rajas and tamas – are manifesting wondrous things. All of the creative power of Prakriti – all of it is coming about in one place like a magic show. There is no end to creation. In that place, Brahmaa, the god of creation, is seated on a lotus-dais; all of the gods, the lineages of sages, the lineages of serpents are all there. All of it is mutation of space into form. (Dear sadhak! With due care, relate this with all of your visions in Kutastha.) 