#### Prose 

आश्चर्यवत्पश्यति कश्चिदेन
माश्चर्यवद्वदति तथैव चान्य: |
आश्चर्यवच्चैनमन्य: शृ्णोति
श्रुत्वाप्येनं वेद न चैव कश्चित् || 29||
āśhcharya-vat paśhyati kaśhchid enan
āśhcharya-vad vadati tathaiva chānyaḥ
āśhcharya-vach chainam anyaḥ śhṛiṇoti
śhrutvāpyenaṁ veda na chaiva kaśhchit

 #### Bengali Translation 

Some see this [Atman/Self] as wondrous; others see this as full of wonders; again some hear this as wondrous; some, even after hearing, are not able to know this.

 #### Commentary 

Dear sadhak, that day when, by satguru's grace, you saw Yourself for the first time, did you not spontaneously feel that as being wondrous (that which I do not know – that is why it is wondrous)? When you had the chance to talk in some place about that Extraordinarily Beautiful Form – because of not being able to find words for that Beautiful Form, you were not able to speak about it – did you not feel the great wonder at that time? And again remember: that “Naad” [Divine Sound] in the womb of the Pranava, the “Bindu” in the womb of the Naad – from that “Ardhanarishwara” [Form of the Lord as half Shiva and half Shakti] Bindu (the Bindu blossoms into two Bindus), when Prakriti came out for the first time – dancing and dancing, and at that time Purush also went on dancing (the vibration of both Bindus); because the vibration of Purush appears in a much greater way, it is called “tandava” [heavy, wild dance]; and because the vibration of Prakriti can be grasped, it is called “lasya” [sensuous dance]. Thus: from the “ta” of “tandava,” and the “la” of “lasya,” the word “tala” [rhythmic cycle in music] comes into being. In the womb of the Unbroken-Naad [unbroken Divine Sound], the consonantal sounds matching Prakriti's rhythmic dance steps – that is called “chanda” [measured beat; rhyme]. And again, this “chanda,” because of the varying durations in sound – such as short, long, sustained etc., and variations in expression – such as heavy or light, can be heard as seven “swaras” [melodic tones making up the musical octave]. When you first heard those sounds, were you not completely stunned, and then steeped in wonder? Okay! And then, when you, right after that [experience], due to the intensity of Ecstasy, were completely drowned in the Ocean of Divine Consciousness, where your “I-ness” ended – were you able to know anything at that time? Was there any “knowingness”? When even “I” is not there, who is to know whom/what? You can see that this sloka matches up with the things of that State that you experienced.