#### Prose 

यततो ह्यपि कौन्तेय पुरुषस्य विपश्चित: |
इन्द्रियाणि प्रमाथीनि हरन्ति प्रसभं मन: || 60||
yatato hyapi kaunteya puruṣhasya vipaśhchitaḥ
indriyāṇi pramāthīni haranti prasabhaṁ manaḥ

तानि सर्वाणि संयम्य युक्त आसीत मत्पर: |
वशे हि यस्येन्द्रियाणि तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता || 61||
tāni sarvāṇi sanyamya yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ
vaśhe hi yasyendriyāṇi tasya prajñā pratiṣhṭhitā

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! When the senses become “pramathi” [agitated], they can forcibly carry away the mind of even a person who is careful and completely aware of good and bad. For this reason, the Self-enjoined yogi, keeps all of those [senses] under control and is “matpara” [intent on the Self]. The one who has the senses under one's power – that is the person whose prajna is established.

 #### Commentary 

The sense-organs are ten in number – five organs of action and five organs of perception. Even when they are not connected to the worldly experience, all of the sense-organs still become automatically active because of their natural functional tendencies. Then a type of affliction comes about. The desire to do more performance of Kriya gradually becomes stronger and goes on stirring the heart. Because the sense-organs have this kind of dharma [of agitation], they are called “pramathi” [agitated]. The person who has understood all of the spiritual subject matters and thereby ascertained the difference between good and bad, but still has not been able to bring all of that under his/her control, yet that sadhak continues to make effort according to the instructions – it is that person who is called “yatnasheel vipaschit” [diligent, wise one]. The mind of even this kind of discriminating sadhak can become drawn to sense-created matters. For this reason, the one who is a “yogi” - he/she gathers in all of the sense-organs, mentally takes them away from all of the matters of worldly partakings, and becomes “matpara” [intent on the Self] – meaning: binding the senses through the power of mind, that sadhak locks the mind in the Effulgent Supreme Person – meaning: has his/her intellect be established [in the Self]. If the sadhak does not become “matpara” in that state and is “prakritipara” [intent on Prakriti], — Begin Footnote. — See the next two slokas. Without controlling the sense-organs, one cannot become “matpara” [intent on the Self]; and if one is not “matpara,” one has to succumb to the powers of the sense-organs. — End Footnote. — then the sense-organs will capture the mind, and that is absolutely certain. But if one becomes “matpara,” then the sense-organs no longer have any power over the mind. It is for this reason that it has been said, “one whose sense-organs are under one's full control – that is the person whose prajna is established.”