#### Prose 

क्षिप्रं भवति धर्मात्मा शश्वच्छान्तिं निगच्छति |
कौन्तेय प्रतिजानीहि न मे भक्त: प्रणश्यति || 31||
kṣhipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā śhaśhvach-chhāntiṁ nigachchhati
kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśhyati

 #### Bengali Translation 

(Even the ones of “sudurachar” [see commentary to 9:30], by meditating on Me,) quickly become “dharmatma” [righteous; see commentary below for spiritual definition and explanation]. And they attain Eternal Peace. O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! My devotees are never destroyed. You can say this avowedly.

 #### Commentary 

One who has once tasted the happiness of being devoted to the Self – for that person, the longing to experience that happiness again comes about – for sure. That longing – for sure – forces the sadhak to make effort to enjoy that happiness [all the time]. And by that effort, the sadhak does actually get that happiness. So, when the repeated longing and repeated practice to enjoy that happiness deepen, very quickly a distaste comes about for the enjoyment of the worldly experiences of sound, touch, sight, taste and scent. The “going about” [see commentary to 9:30] ends. “Dharana” [natural state of concentration] comes forth. This “dharana” is verily that which is called “dharma” [holding to Truth]. Then the chitta [personal consciousness] becomes locked in this dharma and remains still. It does not hold to anything else. This is the state of  “dharmatma” [holding to the Self]. This state is “shashvata” [pure] – the home and abode of Peace. When one becomes a devotee – becomes “ananyabhak” [single-mindedly devoted] – one can – for sure – go to this pure home and abode of Peace. One does not have to face destruction – meaning: one no longer is deluded by the attachment to the worldly experience, and one does not have to experience birth and death again and again. Dear sadhak! Now you have risen to the Ajna chakra, and through meditative worship, you have become adept at drawing/attracting jnana and vijnana through direct experience, and have thereby attained the title of “Kaunteya” [one who can draw/attract divine things; see commentary to 1:27], now you can, with “pratijnaa” [you can state avowedly] (“prati” [for; on; to] + “jna” = the object of knowledge – “I”; + “aa” = “aasakti” [attached-ness] – meaning: the “I” that is the object of knowledge – you can now be attached to that “I”, experience the State of “I”, and say, “by being the devotee of ‘I’, I will never be destroyed.”