#### Prose 

अविभक्तं च भूतेषु विभक्तमिव च स्थितम् |
भूतभर्तृ च तज्ज्ञेयं ग्रसिष्णु प्रभविष्णु च || 17||
avibhaktaṁ cha bhūteṣhu vibhaktam iva cha sthitam
bhūta-bhartṛi cha taj jñeyaṁ grasiṣhṇu prabhaviṣhṇu cha

 #### Bengali Translation 

Although It is Undivided, It resides within all phenomena/living beings as if It is divided. That Substance that is to be known (during the manifested state [of phenomena]) is the sustainer of all phenomena/living beings. (During the destruction-state [of phenomena]) It is the Devourer, and (during the creation-state), It is actively creating with many operations. 

 #### Commentary 

When smoke floats in the sky, it is true that one sees the sky as if it is filled with smoke. However, just as there is no association (mingling) of the smoke and the sky, no mark of smoke remains on the body of the sky, and the space does not become divided either – in the same way, although the phenomena and the upper expanse is seen as the one and same by the ignorant, the true perception is had by eyes of the jnani [wise], [who sees that Brahman] is Unassociated/Unmixed with anything, always apart [from phenomena] and Undivided. It is like this: one Maya has three gunas – at the time of the activity of the rajoguna, there is the dressing up as Brahmaa [the creator] and the happening of creation; at the time of the activity of sattva guna, there is the dressing up as Vishnu and the operative happenings; and at the time of the activity of the tamoguna, there is the Form of Hara [Maheshvara] and the happenings of destruction. Even though this appears to be so, when the three gunas are in repose, nothing at all remains. Only phenomena/beings – to put it straight – [is/are] “apparently embedded” (like silver in mother-of-pearl, the snake in the rope, the knowledge of water in the thirst of the deer, delusion is itself delusion) – like that.