#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
इमं विवस्वते योगं प्रोक्तवानहमव्ययम् |
विवस्वान्मनवे प्राह मनुरिक्ष्वाकवेऽब्रवीत् || 1||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam
vivasvān manave prāha manur ikṣhvākave ’bravīt

एवं परम्पराप्राप्तमिमं राजर्षयो विदु: |
स कालेनेह महता योगो नष्ट: परन्तप || 2||
evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣhayo viduḥ
sa kāleneha mahatā yogo naṣhṭaḥ parantapa

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said, “I communicated this 'avyayayoga' [yoga of the Inexhaustible] to “Vivasvan.” Vivasvan communicated it to “Manu,” and Manu communicated it to “Ikshvaku.” Through such lineage, the “rajarshis” [royal sages] learned this yoga. O Parantapa [Arjuna]! Later, due to the passage of time, this yoga was lost on this plane.”

 #### Commentary 

The matters of Sankhyayoga and Karmayoga that have been elucidated in the second and third chapters [respectively] – that is being spoken of here as “imaṃ yogaṃ” [“this yoga”; see line 1 of sloka 4:1 above]. Sankhyayoga is knowledge through intuitive perception, and Karmayoga is knowledge through the performance of a method. Intuitive perception (gyana [ascertainment]) is not enough [for spiritual realization] only by itself, and performance of a method (karma [yogic practice]) too is not enough [for spiritual realization] only by itself. A combination (yoga [joining]) of these two (gyana and karma) is needed. Thus, the knowledge that comes forth from the union of intuitive perception and the performance of a method – that is “gyanayoga,” the result of the combination of the knowledge spoken about in the second and third chapters (Sankhya and Karma [respectively]). The meaning of the word “yoga” in these slokas [4:1 and 4:2 above] have to be understood as “gyana” [knowledge; knowingness] or “gyanayoga.” Because this “gyana” is explained in this fourth chapter [of the Gita], the name of this chapter is “gyanayoga.” To explain that gyanayoga is eternal – imperishable, after having shown the continuation of gyanayoga in these slokas – the reason for gyanayoga's disappearance – that cause has been explained [here]. The Luminous Sphere that can be seen through yoga-Kriya – with Light resembling the brightness of a thousand suns and the serenity of a thousand moons – that is verily “Vivasvan” [the Sun] or “Savita” [Spiritual Sun]. He is self-revealed. It is by his light that the universe is seen. When that Savita rises, if one steadies one's consciousness in the light,      “savitṛmaNDalamadhyavarteernArAyaNah” [Narayana [the Lord] – situated in the middle of the sphere of the Sun] - “Goloknath” [the Lord of the Spiritual Realm] is seen. It is He that is “Ahaṃ” [“I”] - Kutastha Chaitanya Sri Krishna. From that Vivasvan, the current of knowingness (the flow of the Light of Consciousness) flows downward and comes into the antahkarana [inner operators of jiva consciousness]. Although the antahkarana is divided in the four parts of chitta [personal consciousness; heart], ahaṃkar [ego; personal “I”], buddhi [intellect] and mana [evident mind], because mind is primary when the antahkarana is creation-faced, the antahkarana, together with all of its parts, are referred to as just “mind.” And when the antahkarana is Brahman-faced, because chitta is primary and ahead of everything else, the antahkarana is called “chitta.” The vritti [functionality] facing creation in the antahkarana is “mana” [mind] or “Manu” [archetypal progenitor]. After the current of knowingness comes into the antahkarana, along with the vritti of ascertainment emerging with it, the inner perception or “manas-netra” [mind's eye] (“pragya-chakshu” [eye of inner perception]) manifests. This inner-world-seeing “manas-netra” or “pragya-chakshu” is “Ikshvaku” [archetypal first king – mythologically of the Solar Dynasty]. After awareness or consciousness dawns within, then the awareness of the external is born via the organs of perception. These organs of perception are the “rajarshis” [royal sages] (although the organs of perception have emerged from the sattvic part of the aggregate of the five elements, their activities are all of the rajas guna; that is why they are “rajarshi” [rishis of rajas guna]). Because the revelation of “gyana” or “gyanayoga” is revealed from one to another in this [aforementioned] way, “gyana” [Knowledge] or “yoga” [union with the Supreme] is received through “parampara” [lineage]. And its fruits have no end, no diminution. Because it eventually becomes infinite by merging with the Infinite Brahman, it is Avyaya [Inexhaustible; Imperishable]. Due to the differences between pravritti [outwardness] and nivritti [inwardness], or desire and detachment [respectively], time is divided into two sections. Going towards Brahman in the path of nivritti, as the current of time becomes weaker until it is at its weakest, the gross dominance of time does not stay; a subtleness comes. Going towards samsara in the path of pravritti, time is “mahat” [great; huge], because it is through pravritti that the current of time becomes very strong. That is why samsara is also called “mahat.” It is to convey this meaning that “mahato bhayat” [“mahat” is frightening] is stated in Chapter 2, sloka 40. And more, with detachment, as the dirt from the mind goes away, the Consciousness of the Self or Knowledge/Knowingness comes forth. And with desire, because the dirt of the worldly experience falls on the mind, the spiritual Knowingness ends. In the world of people, this yoga of the Knowledge of the Self has been destroyed by the creation-facing vritti of desire – meaning: it [this yoga] has been covered up; -- Begin Footnote. -- Just as there is loss of memory because of aberrations in the brain due to illness, injury and stress, similarly, the Knowledge of the Self is lost because of aberrations in the faculty of intellect due to desires for worldly experiences and lack of self-control (or indulgence [in worldly experiences]). -- End Footnote. -- that is why it cannot be known by everyone.