#### Prose 

ये तु सर्वाणि कर्माणि मयि संन्न्यस्य मत्पर: |
अनन्येनैव योगेन मां ध्यायन्त उपासते || 6||
ye tu sarvāṇi karmāṇi mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ
ananyenaiva yogena māṁ dhyāyanta upāsate

तेषामहं समुद्धर्ता मृत्युसंसारसागरात् |
भवामि नचिरात्पार्थ मय्यावेशितचेतसाम् || 7||
teṣhām ahaṁ samuddhartā mṛityu-saṁsāra-sāgarāt
bhavāmi na chirāt pārtha mayy āveśhita-chetasām

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Partha! However, those who surrender all action to Me, and, with single-minded devotion, rely solely on Me, and, contemplating Me at all times and worshiping Me, fully establish their hearts in Me – I save all of those people, without delay, from the deathendowed ocean of samsara.

 #### Commentary 

The one who takes all “karma” [actions] – meaning: the operation of the expelling and drawing of 21,600 breaths – and surrenders it to “I” – meaning: fully submits it in the brahmanadi, and, via the yoga of single-minded devotion, does not have the error of keeping contact with thoughts in other directions, and thereby takes up that Brahman-mantra, which is the speech of “I”, and goes on to worship by meditating on the Form of the Divine – meaning: attains the Settledness in the Self (samadhi) – that is the one who becomes “mayyAveshitachitta” [one whose mind/heart has entered into Me], and it is that being who, very quickly, is delivered from the ocean of death-samsara, as well as the calamitous current of coming and going, and [that one] remains lodged up above. One becomes “I”. The word “matparAh” [refuge in Me] in this sloka is referring to taking recourse in the Unstruck Sound – meaning: that which, according to yogic scriptures, is the “shravan” [hearing] Kriya of Kriyayoga. “MAṃ dhyAyantah” [meditation on Me] means “manan” [meditation/contemplation], and the word “upAsate” means the Kriya of “nididhyAsana” [absorption]. If the sadhak follows the teachings of guru, and perfects these three Kriyas, it does not take very long for that sadhak to be freed from samsara after that. That sadhak quickly goes beyond death — Begin Footnote. — See Chapter 2, sloka 26 [of the Pranab Gita] for the definition of “mrityu” [death]. — End Footnote. — and becomes jivanmukta [Liberated while still carrying on bodily life].