#### Prose 

स एवायं मया तेऽद्य योग: प्रोक्त: पुरातन: |
भक्तोऽसि मे सखा चेति रहस्यं ह्येतदुत्तमम् || 3||
sa evāyaṁ mayā te ’dya yogaḥ proktaḥ purātanaḥ
bhakto ’si me sakhā cheti rahasyaṁ hyetad uttamam

 #### Bengali Translation 

You are My “bhakta” [devotee] and “sakha” [friend]. For this reason, I am telling you today about this yoga, which, indeed, is a supreme secret/mystery.

 #### Commentary 

Today, upon the sadhak attaining “savichar-samadhi” [absorption through investigation] by having taken up Karmayoga [spiritual practice], [the Lord] is having the sadhak hear about and experience that yoga of the Knowledge of the Self. The sadhak is observing that the fountain of the Knowledge of the Self from this Gita is springing forth because three conditions are coming together at once. Those three conditions are: “desh” [place; space], “kaal” [time] and “patra” [vessel; recipient]. (1)     “Desh” [place; space] is the place in the middle, between the two sides [of warriors] in Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra. The sadhak, taking recourse in karma [yogic practice], has been able to enter inside the sushumna. That is why the “desh” aspect is present. (2)     “Kaal” [time] is “Adya” [today; see line 1 of sloka 4:3 above for the occurrence of the word] – meaning: the first day of the war, just before the commencement of battle, when the sadhak is looking in a steady and still way at Kutastha in front, and the current of that Light of Consciousness is fully falling upon the sadhak. (3)     “Patra” [vessel; recipient] is the sadhak's attitude of being a “bhakta” [devotee] and “sakha” [friend]. The singular attachment to God is called “devotion,” and the feeling of mutuality with God is called “friendship.” Because the sadhak today is thus: “shiShyaste'haṃ sAdhi mAṃ tvAṃ prapannam” [I am Your disciple; teach me; I surrender to You] – and he/she has shun away all vanity of ego and the love for the Consciousness of the Self has awakened within the sadhak – that is why the sadhak is “bhakta” [devotee]. And as the exhalation and inhalation has become subtle, easy and straight, inward moving, and balanced in proportion – meaning: upon the coming about of the equilibrium of prana, — Begin Footnote. — When the movement and density of the breath together becomes very diminutive and very fine, and it ceases to be uneven, when the mind can slowly and effortlessly go up and down the narrow, “spider web's filament-like” sushumna nadi, when no type of tension or pain/discomfort remains in the body and mind, instead an inexpressible joy spreads within – that is verily the state of the equilibrium of prana. This state has to be understood by one's own experience through the practice of Kriya. It cannot be explained. — End Footnote. — – the sadhak is “sakha” [friend]. Because these three conditions have come together today, the sadhak is able to receive this wisdom. If this state does not happen, no one at all can know this [wisdom]. That is why it has been called a secret/mystery – meaning: it is hidden, covered from the sight of ordinary people. The one who has been able to open the lid of the mind – that is the one who has been able to know Him. That being has come to know that this [Knowledge] is Ancient, this is Supreme, because it is through this [Knowledge] that the tamah of the upper field – meaning: “Kaivalya-Sthiti” [abidance in Only-ness] – is attained.