#### Prose 

रसोऽहमप्सु कौन्तेय प्रभास्मि शशिसूर्ययो: |
प्रणव: सर्ववेदेषु शब्द: खे पौरुषं नृषु || 8||
raso ’ham apsu kaunteya prabhāsmi śhaśhi-sūryayoḥ
praṇavaḥ sarva-vedeṣhu śhabdaḥ khe pauruṣhaṁ nṛiṣhu

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Kaunteya [Arjuna]! I am the liquidity in water. I am the radiance of the sun and the moon. I am the Pranava of all the Vedas. I am the sound in the space-element. I am the “paurush” [consciousness that acts] within living beings.

 #### Commentary 

That the Lord is within all phenomena, that all of these [phenomena] are strung upon Him – how that is – that is what He is showing, one by one, in five slokas – 8 through 12 [of this Chapter 7]. The Lord has Maya within Him. That is how, even though He is One, through wondrous ways, He manifests in many forms as the “I” dressed up in many ways. Prakriti arises from Him. Therefore, the Prakritic things are bound to Him. It is He Who is the only Substratum and is present in all phenomena. Just as He is present in the macrocosm of the fourteen planes, He is present in exactly the same way in the microcosm of the bodies of the jivas. That is how the yogi is able to directly experience the entire Cosmos within his/her own body. And now, because the yogi is receiving direct Knowledge due to upasana, he/she is now seeing firsthand where and how the Supreme Lord – Who is the Substratum of the Cosmos-sheath of the body – manifests and how He is sustaining the Cosmos. In these five slokas [7:8 through 7:12], all of those manifestations have been stated in 16 ways. Those are being elaborated upon in numbered sequence below: (1) “I am the liquidity in water.” In the form of “aham” or “I”, the Lord, pervading the Sky of Brahman within the sushumna which runs from the Sahasrar to the Muladhar, and residing there as Himself, through the Maya of His Self, has spread His “I-ness” and become the innumerable things (like the way the same earth becomes the many forms of sand, pebbles, coal, stone, metal, jewels etc.). Thus, at the Svadhisthan, He is the liquid-element. Liquidity is the basis of fluids. Because all the different forms of an element are meant by the name of the predominant manifestation, the Lord says, “ap” [see first line of above sloka] – meaning: water – and using that name, He says, “I am the liquidity in fluids.” The “I-ness” of the Lord is verily the Consciousness-Power. (2) “I am the moon and sun’s radiance.” That very “I-ness” of the Lord reveals Itself as the Light of Consciousness in the Sahasrar. That Light becomes reflected light at the mouth of the pingala [nadi] and takes on the form of “Vivasvan” [sun] or “all forms” [the revelatory principle]; and at the mouth of ida [nadi], the Light becomes reflected light and takes on the form of the moon, or the form of “shashi” [moon]. This moon and sun are the rulers of ida and pingala, respectively. And because they are the predominant manifestations in the realm of visible light, addressing their names mean the entirety of the world of light. Because their radiance or light is an expression of a part of the Light of Consciousness, the Lord, in the form of radiance, is the foundation of all light. (3) “I am the Pranava of all of the Vedas.” The sushumna, extending from the Sahasrar to the Muladhar, is the real abode of the Vedas or Shabda-Brahman [Divine Sound]. That is why it is called (the Origin of Sound) “Sarasvati” [Goddess of knowledge and music]. The Vedas are divided into Rik, Yajuh, Sama and Atharva (see the commentary to Chapter 2, sloka 45 [of the Pranab Gita]). Here, the “I-ness” of the Lord is in the form of Pranava or Omkar. That is why Pranava is His Speech. Here, whatever is sounded – all of that happens because their source is that Pranava. All of that is the play of Pranava. Thus, the Lord, in the form of Pranava, is the foundation of the Vedas. (4) “I am the sound in the space-element.” The space-element comes forth from the Lord's “I-ness” taking the form of the sound in the tanmatra [source of sense-perception] of sound. Thus, He is the foundation of the space-element in the form of sound. (5) “I am the 'paurush' [consciousness that acts] in every person”: Amongst the beings in the world of living beings, the “nara” or the human is the highest. When the name of the highest is addressed, it means all living beings. Thus, the word “nara” means “jiva,” or living beings [and not just humans]. The Power by which the sense-organs carry out their activities, and by which the mind and intellect are able to be engaged in their particular activities – that is “paurush” - meaning: exertion, effort, or the “endeavoring to act.” The “I-ness” of the Lord is actually the essential “endeavoring to act.” Thus, the Lord, in the form of “paurush,” is the foundation of the human beings.