#### Prose 

बहूनां जन्मनामन्ते ज्ञानवान्मां प्रपद्यते |
वासुदेव: सर्वमिति स महात्मा सुदुर्लभ: || 19||
bahūnāṁ janmanām ante jñānavān māṁ prapadyate
vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā su-durlabhaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Upon the finishing of many births, the “jnanavan” [knowledge-endowed] know “all is Vasudeva [God]” - and thus attain Me.

 #### Commentary 

Only the Self is True; other than That, all is untrue. The one who has understood this and thereby has become wholly engaged in the service of the Supreme Self – that is the one who is “jnanavan” [knowledge-endowed]. And the one who has directly experienced and realized that Truth and thereby attained the Self Itself – that one is “jnani.” Thus, the “arta,” “jijnasu,” and “artharthi” - all of them are “jnanavan.” To become a “jnani” from being a “jnanavan” one has to go through many births. — Begin Footnote. — For the meaning of “many births,” see the definition and explanation of “many births” in the commentary to sloka 45 of Chapter 6 [of the Pranab Gita]. Besides that, the piercing of each of the coverings of Prakriti are also “different births.” The “annamaya” [physical], “pranamaya” [pranic], “manomaya” [mental], “vijnanamaya” [intellectual] and “anandamaya” [blissful] – these five “koshas” [sheaths] are the “coverings.” The “annamaya” and “pranamaya” sheaths are of the physical body, and the “manomaya,” “vijnanamaya” and “anandamaya” sheaths are of the subtle body that contains the aggregate of mind-intellect-ego-consciousness. Breaking through each of the coverings in the subtle body and going from one to the next one above is also the “taking of different births.” — End Footnote. — Becoming a jnani is that which is meant by the “mAṃ prapadyate” state – meaning: “attaining Me” or the State of the attainment of the Self Itself. When this State is attained, “all is Vasudeva [God]”; when there is this kind of Unified Knowledge, there is the seeing of the Self in all. The person who has attained this kind of State of the Self is “mahatma” [great soul]. A “mahatma” is very rare – meaning: “mahatma” – as referred to in the statement in sloka 3 [of this Chapter 7] – “kashchinmAṃ vetti tattvatah” [very few know Me] – very few people indeed – perhaps among thousands of siddhas [adepts; see sloka 7:3], there is one that attains the “I”. Thus, a “mahatma-being” who has attained this State is very rare.