#### Prose 

प्रयत्नाद्यतमानस्तु योगी संशुद्धकिल्बिष: |
अनेकजन्मसंसिद्धस्ततो याति परां गतिम् || 45||
prayatnād yatamānas tu yogī sanśhuddha-kilbiṣhaḥ
aneka-janma-sansiddhas tato yāti parāṁ gatim

 #### Bengali Translation 

Indeed, the yogi, having been more and more focused on spiritual practice throughout births, becomes gradually free of all sin, and after many births, attains perfection. And thereafter, attains the Supreme Destination.

 #### Commentary 

After answering Arjuna's questions in slokas 40 to 44 [of this Chapter 6], the Lord is now showing that being a yogi is best. If one is a yogi, even if one is not of good discipline, the Supreme Destiny is definitely attained. One does not have to be destroyed like those who are non-connected [spiritually]. “Yogi” - meaning: one who is reverent and faithful in the performance of [spiritual] yoga; one who is “prayatnAt yatamAnah” [persevering in effort; see first line of above sloka] – meaning: the yogi's subsequent efforts are greater and greater, the next one more strong than the previous one. This is because: the adeptness that comes from giving effort the first time – when the effort is made the second time, one does not need as much strength to progress the same amount. That is because the impressed tendencies born of the practice of the first time become firmly locked in the mind. And the second time, that same action happens simply by the power of those impressed tendencies. Therefore, because the discipline is not given to wrong ways, it continues to gradually grow. Later, as one becomes practiced at yoga, one becomes “saṃshuddhakilvishah” [purified of sins; see first line of above sloka] – meaning: as the chitta [personal consciousness] is purified, one is no longer wrapped up in the sin of the worldly experience. But even if the chitta is purified, Emancipation does not happen without meditation. That is why it has been said: “anekajanmasaṃsiddha stato yAti parAṃ gati” [becomes perfected through many births and then attains the Supreme Goal; see last line of above sloka]. Now, what is “aneka janma” [many “janmas” [births]]? The “pralaya” [dissolution] that comes about when the breath is expelled and there is no ability to draw it again (death) – that is called “mahapralaya” [great dissolution]. To take a body after this “mahapralaya” is called “janma” [birth]. Similarly, the time that is there between exhalation and before drawing it in is called “khandapralaya” [segmented dissolution]. To inhale after this “khandapralaya” is also called “janma” [birth]. Now, the time needed to attain perfection is proportionately greater or lesser according to the greater or lesser amount of discipline. If the discipline/practice is light [not strong], then there is the “birth” [taking a physical body] that is after “mahapralaya” [physical death]. Perfection is attained after many of those types of births. But if the discipline/practice is intense, then the “birth” [inhalation] that is after “khandapralaya” [the pause following exhalation] – after many of those types of “births” – meaning: after many pranayams – perfection is attained. That is why the sage Patanjali has written the aphorism: “teevrasamvegAnAmAsannah” - meaning: those whose “samvega” [practice; effort; endeavor] is “teevra” [intense], they attain “asanna” - meaning: samadhi; they attain perfection rapidly. (The firmest active principle that is fundamental to the taking on of an endeavor/action is called “samvega” [adjunct of power].) That is why, it is also written in the scriptures: “atyutkatapuNyapApanAmihaiva phalamashrute [very quickly are the fruits of merits and demerits finished in this world itself].” If the effort is intense, the yogi becomes perfected in just one lifetime via the practice of a certain amount of pranayams. — Begin Footnote. — Yogis have determined that if pranayam is done according to the proper method twelve times in one sitting, “pratyahar” [in-turning] happens to the mind. Twelve times this – meaning: if pranayam is done 144 times [in one sitting], “dharana” [concentration; fixed-ness on a point] takes place. 12 times that – meaning: if pranayam is done 1,728 times, the “dhyan-avastha” [state of meditation] comes about. And 12 times that – meaning: if pranayam is done 20,736 times, there is samadhi. — End Footnote. — But if the effort is not intense, then [perfection] is not attained in one lifetime; one has to be born many times. Upon the attaining of “samsiddhi” [perfection] (samadhi), soon afterwards, that samadhi ripens to asampragyata samadhi with no seeds, and Kaivalya-Sthiti [Abidance in Only-ness] – the Supreme Destination – Brahman-Nirvana – is attained.