#### Prose 

तपस्विभ्योऽधिकोयोगी
ज्ञानिभ्योऽपिमतोऽधिक:|
कर्मिभ्यश्चाधिकोयोगी
तस्माद्योगीभवार्जुन|| 46||
tapasvibhyo ’dhiko yogī
jñānibhyo ’pi mato ’dhikaḥ
karmibhyaśh chādhiko yogī
tasmād yogī bhavārjuna

 #### Bengali Translation 

In My view, the yogi is greater than the “tapasvi” [performer of austerities], greater even than the “gyani” [one who is knowledgeable in spirituality], and greater than the “karmi” [performer of rites] as well. Therefore, O Arjuna. Be thou a yogi.

 #### Commentary 

The one who is not attached to the fruits of actions that must be done – that is the one who is a yogi. This is because: when there is no attachment to the fruits of actions, there is the perception of oneness in all things everywhere. The chitta [personal consciousness] merges into Vasudeva [Sri Krishna; the Supreme Being] automatically. Therefore, at that time (in the state where there is no memory of vrittis [active principles], where one is not unsettled by even the heaviest of pains/sorrows), even if there is contact with the worldly experience, because no impression is etched on the chitta, one does not get dislodged from the Self-Truth. For this reason, the yogi is greater than the “tapasvi” [performer of austerities], “gyani” [spiritually knowledgeable one] and “karmi” [performer of rites]. As in the external: the one who practices “chandrayan vrata” [a prescribed type of fasting] and such – that person is a “tapasvi.” The one who is knowledgeable in scriptures and sciences [or: scriptural sciences] – that person is a “gyani.” And one who performs “agnihotra” [fire-ceremony] and such karmas [rites] – that person is a “karmi.” Similarly, in the path of yoga: when the sadhak puts mind into prana, when that sadhak does the pranayam of moving prana through the six chakras – at that time the sadhak is a “karmi” [performer of the yogic act]. When the sadhak stills prana in the Tapoloka Agya (“bhruvormadhye prAnamaveshya samyak” [completely establish prana between the eyebrows]) – at that time the sadhak is a “tapasvi” [performing renunciation of prana]. And when the sadhak puts mind into Mind and goes on knowing the Self-Truth – at that time the sadhak is a “gyani” [knower of the Self]. In all of these states, the mind is present in one area – meaning: it takes up one specific aspect of spirituality. But when one is free of all attachment and the state of “yatra yatra mano yAti tatraiva brahma lakshyate” [wherever, or in whatever, the attention goes, there, or in that, Brahman is seen] comes forth, then the mind does not take up just one specific aspect of spirituality. Having the perception of Brahman-ness, the being becomes all-pervading. One becomes “yogi” [united with Supreme Spirit]. Therefore, this state is greater than all others. This is, verily, that which is beyond the sadhana of being “jivanmukta” [Liberated while in the body] – the “vidhinishedhavarjita avastha” [state without rules and restrictions]. That is why the Lord, by saying, “tasmAd yogee bhavArjuna” [therefore, Arjuna, be thou a yogi; see last line of above sloka], is advising [the sadhak] to be a “yogi” - meaning: do the dutiful karma [yogic practice] without attachment. He has said previously as well, “asakta hyacharan karma paramApnoti puruShah” [by performing karma [spiritual act] without attachment, one attains the Supreme]. 