#### Prose 

भूमिरापोऽनलो वायु: खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च |
अहङ्कार इतीयं मे भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा || 4||
bhūmir-āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva cha
ahankāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛitir aṣhṭadhā

 #### Bengali Translation 

Earth, water, fire, air, space, mind, intellect and ego – My one Prakriti [Nature of Manifestation] is divided into these eight forms.

 #### Commentary 

“Avyakta” [the Inexpressible] or the “Mula Prakriti” [the Root Prakriti] – is divided in these twenty-four parts: five primal elements, five tanmatras [sources of the senses], ten sense-organs and four antahkaranas [inner operators of personal consciousness]. — Begin Footnote. — See Chapter 10, sloka 6 [of the Pranab Gita]. — End Footnote. — Because these twenty-four arise from Avyakta, Avyakta is not taken as a separate substance. Some do take it as separate. If Avyakta is taken as separate, then Avyakta is number twenty-five and Purush [the Being] is number twenty-six. Otherwise, Purush Itself is number twenty-five. Although Prakriti is divided into these twenty-four substances, in practical reality it is actually divided into eight parts. Through mutations, sixteen more attributes arise from those eight and then it becomes twenty-four substances. In this sloka, the non-mutated eight divisions of Prakriti have been presented. The eight divisions are these: (1) “bhoomi” - the earth-element; its abode is Muladhar; (2) “aap” - the liquid-element; its abode is Svadhisthan; (3) “anala” - the fire-element; its abode is Manipur; (4) “vayu” - the air-element; its abode is Anahata; (5) “khang” [“kham”] - the space-element; its abode is Vishuddha; (6) mind – it is the eleventh sense, the leader of the ten sense-organs; thus, the word “mind” also means the ten sense-organs; the mind's god is the moon and its abode is in the Ajna, in the inner area of the Kutastha, where the moon-sphere shines — Begin Footnote. — See fourth illustration in the first section [Introduction]. — End Footnote. — ; (7) “buddhi” [intellect] – the word “buddhi” also means “Mahat-tattva,” which is the cause of buddhi; its god is Brahmaa [the creator aspect of the Hindu trinity], and its abode is in Ajna, in the outer area of Kutastha where Vivasvan [the sun sphere] shines; (8) “ahamkar” [I-sense] – the word “ahamkar” means the “Avidya” [primal not-knowing] enjoined Avyakta; ahamkar itself is the cause of the spreading out of creation; for this reason, the Root Cause Avyakta is considered to be within this ahamkar; ahamkar's abode is above, in the “dashangula” [ten-fingers breadth space above the Ajna] and Sahasrar. The sadhak is now engaged in upasana, settled near Kutastha Chaitanya. Everything is visible to the sadhak. Nothing is far away any more. Everything is nearby. That is why the Lord is bringing attention to, and showing, “iyaṃ me prakṛtiraShTadhA bhinna” – [meaning:] in this Ajna, My Prakriti is divided into eight parts.