#### Prose 

किं कर्म किमकर्मेति कवयोऽप्यत्र मोहिता: |
तत्ते कर्म प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेऽशुभात् || 16||
kiṁ karma kim akarmeti kavayo ’pyatra mohitāḥ
tat te karma pravakṣhyāmi yaj jñātvā mokṣhyase ’śhubhāt

 #### Bengali Translation 

What is karma? What, again, is “akarma” [inaction; non-action]? Even “kavi[s]” [poets; deep inquirers] are confused about this. Therefore, I am telling you about the matters of that karma, by knowing which, you will be able to attain Liberation from evil.

 #### Commentary 

One who expresses a new feeling in every single statement – that one is a “kavi” [poet; deep inquirer]. One who, starting with feeling-states, progressing little by little through practice, goes beyond feelings, because new supernatural events manifest with each stage and because discrimination-knowledge dawns for that person – that being is a “kavi” as well. And again, one who begins at the first stage of Kriya-practice and moves forward to reach the State of Knowledge, because his/her inner coverings are destroyed day by day, that sadhak's vision expands in new ways and that sadhak sees all of the substances and their causalities, stage by stage. Even though that sadhak “returns to appear” [in the world] during the [ordinary] waking state, because those previously seen things remain in memory, when that sadhak begins Kriya again, his/her path becomes easy to travel. This sadhak, who is endowed with the power of intelligence and knowledge of the substances, is also “kavi.” Even for these kinds of daily progressing, discriminating, intelligent and knowledgeable sadhaks on the path of Kriya, because of having to experience worldly things during the [ordinary] waking state, the chitta [personal consciousness; heart] contacts erroneousness. For this reason, the next day, during the practice of Kriya, even though one rises above via the continual remembrance of the Atma-mantra, just before samadhi, because of the contact with worldly matters, the lower vrittis [functionalities] rise up in the mind. But at that time, mind, because of being weak and becoming numb, falls to the pull of the memories of the worldly experience, and breaks off from Consciousness/Spirit. The benumbed state accompanied by weak memories that comes about just before samadhi – whether at that time the force of the karma [practice] goes towards Consciousness/Spirit, or goes towards the worldly experience – one does not know. Thus, the state of silence that comes about in samadhi – whether that is the correct “akarma” [non-action] or not – meaning: whether that state is being experienced in Consciousness/Spirit or in the worldly-consciousness – one is not able to even apprehend that. At this time, one has to remain stupefied; there is no discernment of “karma” and “akarma.” After samadhi breaks, when the mind becomes quite awake, at that time, whether that still state was “yoga-nidra” [yogic withdrawal] or samadhi, or whether it was “vishaya-nidra” [withdrawal into ignorance] or sleep – one is not able to discern that. The fact that one can be entranced by the sleep of ignorance even after doing Kriya – this is “ashubha” [non-benevolence; evil] [see “'shubha” [the apostrophe takes the place of “a” for textual flow] in the last line of the sloka above for the occurrence of the word]. That is because this is that which is the bondage of samsara. Which karma [act] can free one from this “ashubha” - that is what Srigurudev [Sri Krishna] reveals in the next slokas.