#### Prose 

अर्जुन उवाच |
ये शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य यजन्ते श्रद्धयान्विता: |
तेषां निष्ठा तु का कृष्ण सत्त्वमाहो रजस्तम: || 1||
arjuna uvācha
ye śhāstra-vidhim utsṛijya yajante śhraddhayānvitāḥ
teṣhāṁ niṣhṭhā tu kā kṛiṣhṇa sattvam āho rajas tamaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Arjuna said: “O Krishna! Those who abandon scriptural injunctions but still perform rites with faith/reverence – what is the quality of their adherence?”

 #### Commentary 

The sadhak [aspirant] is now questioning within him/herself. When vayu [vital-force] is moved through the path of Brahman, innumerable gods and goddesses such as Shashthi, Makal (Mahakaal), from Khnetu to Brahmaa, Vishnu, Maheshvara, and even Mahashakti with Her sattva, rajas and tamas gunas can be seen. So many proofs [direct hearing] of the author-less scriptures (“shruti” [that which is heard; “shruti[s]” also means: Vedas and Upanishads]), doing things that were far from even being imagined that I could do in this lifetime – these kinds of things are remembered (smriti [that which is remembered; “smriti[s]” also means: all other scriptures besides the Vedas and Upanishads]). The things that were seen by very old people, the things that they heard; but I have not seen or heard these things; these ancient (“purana” [ancient; “purana[s]” also means: mythological scriptures]) stories, and so many hymns – I see [and hear] them directly. But not one of these is outside [the body]. When I see, hear, feel, understand all of these, and then when the mind goes to those things, it is as if there is a feeling of absorption. That [kind of] performance [of practice] with faith/reverence – in this case – stops (makes one abandon) the scriptural injunctions ([stops] the guru-revealed teaching of moving vayu). The reason is: as one is not able to stay exactly in the middle of the brahmanadi, the error of contacting these things comes about (Chapter 5, sloka 10 of the Pranab Gita). This engagement in the performance of rites (the worship of gods and goddesses and being absorbed in element-matters) – is this adherence (faith/reverence) sattva, rajas or tamas [the three essential qualities or gunas]? O Krishna! Tell me this very thing.