#### Prose 

तस्मात्त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्व
जित्वा शत्रून्भुङ् क्ष्व राज्यं समृद्धम् |
मयैवैते निहता: पूर्वमेव
निमित्तमात्रं भव सव्यसाचिन् || 33||
tasmāt tvam uttiṣhṭha yaśho labhasva
jitvā śhatrūn bhuṅkṣhva rājyaṁ samṛiddham
mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva
nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sāchin

 #### Bengali Translation 

Therefore, rise up (for battle). Gain fame. Defeat your enemies and enjoy prosperous kingship. All of these (your enemies) have already been killed by Me even before the war. O Savyasachin [ambidextrous one]! You are merely an instrument [for the inevitable event to take place].

 #### Commentary 

Therefore, there is nothing for you to fear any more. Everything Prakritic, such as the reflected consciousness etc. – all of it is just an illusory trick of the Maya-enjoying ahamkar [false “I”; ego]. The day that the jiva [soul] forgot the True “I” and took its place in the false “I” – it is from that day onward that the soul took up the dharma of death. So, what reason do you have now for being despondent?! All of them, due to inevitable law, will have to be consumed by Me as Time anyway. Therefore, rise up to do battle. “UttiShTha” [rise up] – rise up to do battle. At the time of battle, the warrior in the chariot has to sit steadily and firmly in a kneeling position with the buttocks resting on the feet. Instead of that, Arjuna, falling under the spell of having compassion and concern for relatives and his own people and such, put down his bow and arrows, took his legs out from that position and sat in a lax and squatted form in the chariot. That is why the Lord is now saying, “uttishtha” [rise up] – meaning: get up and sit in a way appropriate and conducive to fighting. At the time of sadhana [meditation], the very same condition comes upon the sadhak [meditator]. After respite, the sadhak too has to sit up – meaning: taking the legs and fixing them in the seated position according to instructions, making the spinal column straight and upright, and holding the chest held upwardly straight, one has to make the body firm [in the seated position]. And then, the mind has to be fixed at the “pa” place above the five elements – meaning: the mind has to be established on top of the “granthi” [junction]. Sitting upright in this way, one has to do Kriya of pranayam and such. This actually is the instruction given in this sloka through the usage of the word “uttishtha.” After that, the Lord is saying, “yasho labhasva” [gain fame; renown]. What is “yash” [fame; renown]? “Yash” [renown] is the expanding of the dominion of the Self throughout all, resulting due to the practice of good works. Before attaining perfection in sadhana [spiritual practice], the Prakritic state remains predominant; the dominion of the Self remains subdued [before attaining perfection]. When perfection is attained, the Prakritic current becomes powerless. At this time, the current of the Self reigns with power. That is “yash” [renown]. That is the beginning of “Kaivalya” [Only-ness] – meaning: letting go of everything except “I”, one becomes the “One and Only” – the state where contraction is destroyed and One is the Expanse. “JitvA shatrun bhungshva rAjyaṃ samṛddham” [being victorious over your enemies, enjoy the prosperous kingship] – (see the commentary to Chapter 2, sloka 8). Be victorious over the enemy-side – meaning: conquer the evil tendencies such as lust, exemplified by Duryodhana and such, and enjoy the problem-free kingdom/kingship – meaning: be jivanmukta [Liberated while alive in the body]. And until the body is discarded [until physical death] – like the way the sky does not experience the chaos and force of an intense storm because it is unattached to the storm – in the same way, you as well remain unattached, and go on enjoying Maya and the Goddess Maya’s enjoyments. Finally, He [Sri Krishna] says, “O Savyasachi [spelling variation], I have already killed all of these [beings; attributes]. You are just an instrument [for the event to take place]!” Through this statement, the Lord has resolved a very complex issue. In samsara [the worldly experience], human beings have lost their sensibilities by believing in the egoistic worldly experience and saying/believing, “I am the one who is doing; I am the one who is doing.” No, no. The human being is not the doer. The human being is only the instrument of action. The ordainer of the fruits of actions is another Ruler, Who is One without a second. Thus, the human being only has the right to act, not the right to the result. By being an instrument, the human being may begin an action – [like] mixing together two or more substances, such as pulverized limestone and turmeric. This operation of mixing is the only bit that [the human being] is capable of doing. But the chemical reaction that takes place that causes the red color to come forth due to the mixing together of pulverized limestone and turmeric – there is no adeptness of the human being that makes that happen. That is the law of the Governor. That law does not change. If turmeric and limestone powder are mixed together, the mixture will become red for certain. It will not become black or some other color. In the same way, if two parts “jalajan” essence (hydrogen) and one part “amlajan” essence (oxygen) mix together, then, for certain, water will be the result. No one can create a different result out of it. All of these types of fixed laws have existed before creation. Thus, whenever that type of action is that will take place – at that time, the fruits of that action will be according to that [action]. In all of the matters of creation, the relationship of karma [action] and karmaphala [results of actions] solely follow this system. The human being is only an excuse/instrument. The ordainer of the fruits is that One without a second, Unimaginable Person in the Form of “I”. Now, this time that has arrived (whether you see it as historical, or as yoga-sadhana) – in this too, that same law is present. Before this standing in the middle area between the two sides of soldiers took place, all of the actions that had happened to bring about this war – [including] the attainment of “savyasachi” [spiritually ambidextrous] that has come about due to the practice of “yama” [stopping of unspiritual actions] and “niyama” [practicing of spiritual actions] and other such practices of the limbs of yoga – the inevitable fruits of [such actions that have already taken place] are now being realized. The inevitable consequence is happening. If at this very time the weapon in the form of pranayam is applied, the lower vrittis [functionalities; automatic tendencies], such as those represented by Duryodhana and such along with Bhishma and Drona and such, will most certainly be annihilated. It will happen automatically. All of those are, already beforehand, “mayaiva nihatAh” [killed by Me, verily] – meaning: the fruits ordained by the Ordainer, the “I”, are already set according to law. Now there is no way of making another kind of result come about. Doing pranayam is only using an instrument/excuse [for the event to happen]. The state to which the sadhak [spiritual practitioner] has now come, upon having become “savyasachi” [spiritually ambidextrous] – because of that, whether he/she wants to or does not want to, the sadhak will have to participate as the instrument. There is no way the sadhak will be able to avoid that. This is because: “svalpamapyasya dharmasya trAyate mahato bhayAt” [even a little of this dharma delivers one from great fear] – according to this statement, the sadhak will never again have to become wrapped up in the earthly part [of being]. And after that: “purvAbhyAsena tenaiva hṛyate hyavasho’pi sah” [due to prior practice, one is carried forward, even without willing to do so] – according to this teaching, the sadhak will most certainly have to go towards Brahman, regardless of his/her will. Later, “kartuṃ necchasi yanmohAt kayisShyasyavasho’pi tam” [because of your actions and your nature, you will do even that which, because of delusion, you do not wish to do] – according to this statement, the sadhak will be forced to act, even if the sadhak does not wish to do so, due to being under the power of results of his/her own karma [previous actions]. Thus, the sadhak has no way of escaping this. The actions that have already been done – the sadhak inevitably has to take part in their results. If now the sadhak exerts his/her own will and does not become the instrument, then the sadhak will not attain “yash” [renown] – [meaning:] the spreading of the State of the Self over Prakriti; the sadhak will not enjoy “asapatnaṃ ṛddham rAjyam” [unrivaled, prosperous kingship], and neither will the sadhak attain the everlonged-for “jivanmukti” [Liberation while living in the body]. The sadhak will fail. And because of that unfulfilled longing [due to not participating in the spiritual task], the seed of samsara will remain in the sadhak. Therefore, the sadhak, under the power of time, will again, for certain, have to return to the path of samsara. This is because desire has such a quality – that it will have to be fulfilled at some point. Without experiencing the result of the desire, the karma will not be dissolved. — Begin Footnote. — Whatever endeavors/rites are taken to attain a wanted thing – that effort for the wanted thing is itself the craving. That itself is the bondage. Without experiencing it, it does not dissolve. And the endeavors/rites that are taken without the wanting of a result, that is not actually a desire. Therefore, that is not bondage. Its result does not come about. Nevertheless, that [act] does cause the consciousness to be distracted and hampers the performance of karma [spiritual practice]. — End Footnote. — If there is no wanting, then no goal remains. But that is impossible because the root cause of taking action is desire itself. Thus, one cannot become desireless without having experienced the fruit of desire. The brilliant example of this is in the enjoyment of the kingdom by Dhruva [a mythological character]. And now, if the sadhak does desire to take part and becomes the instrument, then the State of the Self will expand through and over all, and the sadhak will attain the renown in the form of having conquered Prakriti. Through the attainment of the state of jivanmukta, the sadhak will satisfy all wants, and thereby all of the seeds of desire will be destroyed. Therefore, the sadhak will never again enter samsara! That is why the Lord is saying: “Through the law of karma, I have already killed all of these [beings; attributes] (meaning: what will happen or not happen, I have predetermined that); you just be an instrument, and end your prarabdha [karmic consequences from previous lives] through experiencing [that which you must] and attain the samadhi which has no seeds [of the worldly experience].” If the sadhak who has perfected the seated posture simply performs the “sahaj karma” [natural/easy act], all [spiritual] operations take place automatically. All of the fruits of yoga come about. Laying down on a bed, as sleep overcomes one, one experiences many states with numerous kinds of sights and sounds due to the fruits of previous actions. But all of that is unreal. Similarly, if one sits in a steady posture and goes about doing Kriya according to guru’s instructions, “yoga-nidra” [yogic sleep] comes automatically, and “prabodhsamay” [time of knowing] comes. At that time, one knows, and, as well, one attains the realization of the non-dual Self (“AtmAnamevAdvayam” [the Self, verily, is not two]). All of that is the Truth and not delusional. Just sticking with doing the karma [spiritual act] while sitting in the steady posture, just as one simply lays in bed, is that which is called “being an instrument.” The inevitable fruit of being an instrument in that way is this: by abiding in the State of the Self, all of the desires of samsara [latent and evident] and the lower vrittis [functionalities] that support such desires are completely annihilated. No possibility of them ever rising up again remains at all. The Lord, addressing Arjuna as “Savyasachi,” is actually showing him that he is perfectly fit to be the instrument. One whose right and left hands/arms work with equal adeptness – that is the person called “Savyasachi.” When, for the sadhak, the vayu [vital-air] is truly moving in the sushumna, then the dual motion of exhalation and inhalation flows equally and easily through both nostrils. And the drawing and expelling movements of the vayu also become equal. The ten-finger-length entering and the twelve-finger-length exiting also are resolved. There are no hindrances at all. The one who is in this particular state – that is the one who is called “Savyasachi” [at ease with both]. In this state, non-attachment takes over the sadhak. The non-sadhaks commit the error of not being an instrument even in this state. That is why it is being said, “Only be an instrument.” 