#### Prose 

नान्यं गुणेभ्य: कर्तारं यदा द्रष्टानुपश्यति |
गुणेभ्यश्च परं वेत्ति मद्भावं सोऽधिगच्छति || 19||
nānyaṁ guṇebhyaḥ kartāraṁ yadā draṣhṭānupaśhyati
guṇebhyaśh cha paraṁ vetti mad-bhāvaṁ so ’dhigachchhati

गुणानेतानतीत्य त्रीन्देही देहसमुद्भवान् |
जन्ममृत्युजरादु:खैर्विमुक्तोऽमृतमश्रुते || 20||
guṇān etān atītya trīn dehī deha-samudbhavān
janma-mṛityu-jarā-duḥkhair vimukto ’mṛitam aśhnute

 #### Bengali Translation 

When the jiva [individual soul], upon becoming a witness, no longer sees anything/anyone as “doer” other than the aggregate of the gunas, and knows the Self that is beyond all of the gunas, which is the Witness of that [the works of the gunas], then that being attains My State (Brahman-ness). The embodied one, going beyond this knowledge [of the gunas] –  which is the seed of the emergence of the body – becomes freed from the pain of birth, death and old age/infirmities, and attains Supreme Bliss.

 #### Commentary 

From what I have now seen, it can be understood that those gunas are the ones that have dressed up as the activities and causalities in/of the worldly experience, and are playing their sports in multifarious ways by [constantly] changing their forms. Showing scenes of the non-living, such as sand, earth, stone etc., and the living, such as humans, animals, birds etc., they are putting up a “world” and causing troubles. The operators of these troubles are none other than those three gunas and no one else. The knowledgeable one who, through concentrated and sustained [spiritual] practice, sees that those three gunas are verily the creators and operators of all of those states and everything, and [also] knows the Self – Who is beyond the gunas and is in the form of Witness [to all] – that is the one who, upon witnessing those guna-matters, attains “I” Itself – meaning: attains My State of Vasudeva [the Omnipresent; the All] (“vAsudeva sarvamiti” [Vasudeva is All] – this direct Knowledge). How does that being attain “Vasudeva-ness”? But like this: those very familiar gunas can no longer put that knowledgeable being inside that body of physical, subtle and causal aspects, [that body that is] is built by those three gunas. In front of that being, their broken illusory web does not become whole again. It is the body that is born and makes one suffer the pains of birth, death and infirmities. But with the destruction of the cause of the appearance of that body, no actions manifest any more. With the absence of a foundation for enjoyment (because of the absence of body-oriented-consciousness) – the non-emergence of the pain of birth, death and old age/infirmities – that is that which is called “the attainment of one’s True Form beyond the three gunas,” the “attainment of Immortality for the embodied one,” or “Emancipation.” And that certainly does happen.