#### Prose 

काङ् क्षन्त: कर्मणां सिद्धिं यजन्त इह देवता: |
क्षिप्रं हि मानुषे लोके सिद्धिर्भवति कर्मजा || 12||
kāṅkṣhantaḥ karmaṇāṁ siddhiṁ yajanta iha devatāḥ
kṣhipraṁ hi mānuṣhe loke siddhir bhavati karmajā

 #### Bengali Translation 

Those who have the longing for the “siddhi” [fulfillment] of many karmas [actions/rites] – they worship the demi-gods here. But in the “manush-loka” [ordinary definition: human-world; see commentary below for spiritual definition], the “siddhi” [fulfillment] of karmas [actions/rites] comes about quickly.

 #### Commentary 

The attainment of attainments – meaning: “Kaivalya-Shanti” [Peace of Only-ness], or being free of the conflicts of pleasure, pain and such – is “siddhi” [attainment/fulfillment]. After crossing the worldly experiences such as sound etc. and placing prana in the sky of consciousness in the field devoid of worldly experiences – the state of stillness that comes – that is that which is called “siddhi.” For the sake of ease in sadhana, the different guru-given dharmas [practices] that are performed – such as first Kriya, second Kriya, third Kriya etc. - the different fruits that come forth from that – that is called “vibhuti” [revelations; blessings]. Practicing those different karmas [yogic practices] with dutifulness, with the intent to follow directives, and without having any desire for one's own attainments is that which is “vidhi” [precept]. If that happens, “siddhi” [attainment] is had. But if the sadhak, due to weakness of heart, is attached to the fruits of those particular karmas [yogic practices] during the time of Kriya – if the sadhak longs for Kaivalya-Shanti in his/her mind – then there is “iha” – meaning: the supplication to the gods in the Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra [see Chapter 1 of the Gita] form of the path of yoga. This means: if there is craving or desire in the mind/heart, as one goes on performing karma [yogic act] on each chakra, as each karma [yogic act] comes to culmination, the ruling gods and goddesses of each of those karmas appear in the vision of the sadhak and bestow the fruits of such desires. Because of desire being in the mind/heart, even though there is the witnessing of deities, one becomes bound in many kinds of ways, and one has to experience the fruits of those karmas. The erosion/destruction of karma does not happen. It is true that meritorious attainments are had, but one does not attain Peace. One cannot become “I”. But if karma [yogic act] is performed in the “manush-loka” [see spiritual definition in the next sentence], then “siddhi” - meaning: the “Kaivalya-Shanti” that is the attainment of attainments – that is quickly had indeed. “Mana” = “veda” - meaning: knowledge/knowingness; “u” = settledness; that, in which knowledge/knowingness is settled is “Manu” [archetypal progenitor] or “mind.” All of the vrittis [functionalities] that emerge from this “Manu” or mind – those are “manushya” or “manush.” This place where the vrittis of mind rise up is the “manush-loka.” The place of the mind is the Agya, in the middle of the eyebrows. In its pure state, the mind is filled with pure sattva [guna]. In this state – the pure sattva filled “Brahmakash” [sky of Brahman] that is in the brahmanadi within the sushumna – the mind takes that as its recourse, spreads down to the Muladhar, and manifests/appears. Later, upon mixing with the rajoguna-filled prana, it becomes active. Then, many vrittis emerge from the mind, and it goes on managing the planes such as Bhu, Bhuvah, Svah etc. The pure sattva-filled sky of Brahman that is the home of the mind is indeed the “manush-loka.” The attainments of the karmas [yogic acts] come about “kshipra” (quickly) – meaning: during the performance of Kriya, not paying attention towards or around the vicinity of any chakra, only taking up the extremely subtle space of the brahmanadi, and moving prana according to the instructions of guru – its power is so great that the cravings of the mind become extinguished and the connection to the world-consciousness is cut. And attention becomes locked in the Taraka-Brahman Nada-Bindu. Thus, at this time, because the mind goes about in the ethers in the support-free state, and because there are no obstacles remaining – that Peace or “Kaivalyasthiti” [Settledness in Only-ness] comes about quickly, this is an absolute and inalterable certainty.