#### Prose 

श्रीभगवानुवाच |
हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतय: |
प्राधान्यत: कुरुश्रेष्ठ नास्त्यन्तो विस्तरस्य मे ||19||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
hanta te kathayiṣhyāmi divyā hyātma-vibhūtayaḥ
prādhānyataḥ kuru-śhreṣhṭha nāstyanto vistarasya me

 #### Bengali Translation 

The Lord said with great emphasis, “O best of the Kurus [Arjuna]! I will now tell you [only] about the primary Manifestations of Mine, because there is no end to My Glory.”

 #### Commentary 

Again, through one’s own Awareness, the previously mentioned queries are being resolved – meaning: one is spontaneously answering one’s own questions by Oneself.
 
“Kurushreshtha” [the best of the Kurus] – the word “kuru” refers to “doing.” Its purport: someone does the work, and the reaper of the fruits is another. It is the same here. Prakriti did the work; the one who fell into bondage is [lesser] “I” (jiva [individual consciousness]). Why? Because I am in “Kurukshetra” [the field of Kuru; the field of work/karma]. From the Manipur to the Muladhar is the “Kurukshetra” of the path of sadhana [spiritual practice]. (See the commentary to slokas 14-15 in Chapter 3 [of the Pranab Gita].) The sadhak for whom there is still the sporting about of lust, anger, greed and delusion/attachment in the area from the Manipur to the Muladhar – that sadhak is referred to as “kuru.” The “best/highest” one among them is the one who has nevertheless attained the right to go above the Ajna-chakra – meaning: this sadhak is not able to let go of lust, anger, greed, delusion/attachment, pride and envy; yet, at the same time, he/she is also connected to the attainments of knowing the Self: spiritual seeing, spiritual hearing, contemplation and absorption. This sadhak has this kind of state of being. That is why this sadhak is being called “kurushreshtha” [the best of the sadhaks who are still in the field of samsara].
 
That Divine Opulence of Mine – meaning: like the endless waves, foam and bubbles in water, so is the manifestation of the Self in the drama of the Cosmos – it has no end. This is because I AM Infinite. That which can be known about Me, is also Infinite, Vast. But, now, I am telling you about some of the most primary ones [Manifestations; Glories].
