#### Prose 

ये त्वक्षरमनिर्देश्यमव्यक्तं पर्युपासते |
सर्वत्रगमचिन्त्यञ्च कूटस्थमचलन्ध्रुवम् || 3||
ye tv akṣharam anirdeśhyam avyaktaṁ paryupāsate
sarvatra-gam achintyañcha kūṭa-stham achalandhruvam

सन्नियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं सर्वत्र समबुद्धय: |
ते प्राप्नुवन्ति मामेव सर्वभूतहिते रता: || 4||
sanniyamyendriya-grāmaṁ sarvatra sama-buddhayaḥ
te prāpnuvanti mām eva sarva-bhūta-hite ratāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

And those who control all of the sense-organs, perceive everything/everywhere as the same, and worship the One Who is “Anirdeshya,” “Avyakta,” “Sarvatragata,” “Achintya,” “Kutastha,” “Achal,” “Dhruva” and “Akshara” – engaged in the beneficence of all beings, they attain Me, verily.

 #### Commentary 

“Aksharam” – that which has no erosion. “Anirdeshyam” – the One Who cannot be defined as anything at any time. “Avyaktam” – the One who is beyond speech – meaning: the One Who cannot even be thought of in words. “Sarvatragata” – the One Who is allpervading, like space. “Achintyam” – the One Who is not within the realm of thought – meaning: the One Who cannot be brought into thinking; “Kutastham” – whatever there is that is visible, is endowed with qualities and [as such] is erroneous [by definition] – that is “kuta” – meaning: the multifarious, imperfect things, the seeds of samsara such as ignorance etc. – that is “kuta.” Just as Maheshvara, the One Who, because of taking on the three aspects of Maya, Prakriti and Vidya, has therefore been called “Mayina,” – similarly, the One Who is the Director of the duality – He is the One Who is called “Kutastha” [the One Who is in the “kuta”]. The One Who has no abode of moving about – that is the One Who is called “Achal” [Immovable]. “Dhruva” means that which is Eternal. When one is able to have all of the sense-organs, the five pranas and mind always under control, and upon doing that, becomes engaged in the beneficence of all beings, when neither the sacred nor the profane arise any more – at that time, the aforementioned epithets of “I” are known. When one falls into that “I”, both the worship of “I” and the attaining of “I” happen. Just as the Self remains the Self even while carrying a visible body – this is also like that.