#### Prose 

सर्वधर्मान्परित्यज्य मामेकं शरणं व्रज |
अहं त्वां सर्वपापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि मा शुच: || 66||
sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śharaṇaṁ vraja
ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣhayiṣhyāmi mā śhuchaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Abandon all dharmas, and take refuge only in Me. I will free you from all sins. Do not grieve.

 #### Commentary 

“Dharma” – this is one word in the Sanskrit language that has a meaning that covers an expansive range. Gradually, from the expansive meaning, it has been brought down to meanings with more particular usages. Adding “mana” [mind [meaning: that which grasps]] to the root “dhṛ,” the combination has culminated into the word “dharma.” According to the root-word-oriented meaning: “that which is held onto for support” – that is “dharma.” This type of definition is there. — Begin Footnote. — “dhAraNAddharmamityAhuh dharmo dhArayate prajAh
yah syAddhAraNasaṃyuktah sa dharmo narapungava”
 
[the “holding on” is that which is called “dharma”; dharma is that which holds together the creation; so it is – that one who holds on to that dharma is the best of humans]
 — End Footnote. — According to this definition (1st definition), the Primal Person Himself, the Lord of creation, the Ordainer is “dharma,” because it is by “holding on to Him” that this creation exists. Thus (2nd definition): the ordinances that He has meted out for the operation of the events of this creation – meaning: the ordinances that have to be held onto in order for the operations of the creation to carry on – that is also “dharma” (the ordinances of creation). As well (3rd definition): that which that Ordainer-Being has meted out for the jiva [individual beings] (particularly for human beings) according to actions and the fruits of actions, by which the two types of fruits of actions have been divided into sin and virtue – that is also called “dharma.” And again (4th definition): because it is through the fruits of virtue that the jiva gradually gets closer to and attains Dharma Itself (the Ruler of creation), virtue is also called “dharma.” And because it is through the fruits of sin that the jiva gradually gets thrown far away from dharma, sin is called “adharma” [unrighteousness]. In this way, gradually (5th definition) life-behavior [or: practice] according to the religious scriptures also has the name “dharma” [religion or religious life]. Because of the ordinances meted out by the Ordainer is called “dharma,” according to that (6th definition), the practical behavior subscribing to societal ordinances is also called “dharma.” It is for this reason that practical scriptures such as “smriti” [all scriptures except Vedas and Upanishads] are called “dharma-shastras” [scriptures teaching righteousness]. (7th definition) – particular duties/ways of life are also called “dharma” – such as: “veera-dharma” [the dharma of heroism], “raja-dharma” [the dharma of kingship], “garhasthya-dharma” [the dharma of being a householder], “sannyas-dharma” [the dharma of the renunciate], “pativratyadharma” [the dharma of married couples] etc.

So go the meanings of the word “dharma.” “That which is held onto for support” – this original meaning is at the root. [But] the word “dharma” can also be used to refer to nature/way of being, qualities, duties etc. – with many such particular meanings. Like the definition associated with one’s/something’s nature/way of being – “jiva-dharma” [the nature/way of being of the jiva], “manushya-dharma” [the nature/way of being of the human being], “stree-dharma” [the nature/way of being of women], “purush-dharma” [the nature/way of being of men], “manodharma” [the nature/way of being of mind] etc. With the meaning of “active qualities,” [there can be] – the dharma [active qualities] of air, the dharma of water etc. The active qualities of all substances are called [the] “dharma” [of such and such substance].
 
The word “sarvadharma” [ordinary meaning: all dharmas; deeper meanings follow in the remainder of this commentary to sloka 18:66] that is there in this sloka [18:66] – the meaning of this has to be understood in a somewhat deeper way. After first discussing its meaning relating to life in the world, the spiritual meaning will be discussed later.
 
In the first chapter [of the Bhagavad Gita], Arjuna has said, “By killing these assassins, our lineage will be destroyed, and there will the incurring of the sin born of the enmity from friends. The ever-existing dharma of the lineage will be destroyed. If dharma [righteousness] is destroyed then adharma [wrongness] will grow. And by that, the ancient dharma of the races and the dharma of the lineages will be ruined.” In the second chapter, he has said, “I have become ignorant of dharma. I am your disciple. Whatever is best – teach me that itself.” The feeling that Arjuna has is: that by the killing of gurus, lineage-persons, friends [and such], their dharma – meaning: virtue – will be diminished and sin will be incurred, and the uprooting of the dharma of lineage and the dharma of race, they [the Pandavas] will incur that sin. The Lord, for Arjuna’s highest good, and to dispel his trepidation regarding the disappearance of dharma and the fear of incurring sin, is saying, “sarvadharmAn parityajya” [abandon all dharmas] – verily abandon all dharmas – meaning: [abandon] all of the injunctions that are there regarding sin and virtue, the injunctions that are there for the protection of lineages (lineage-dharma), and the injunctions that are there regarding the protection of the race (race-dharma), and all of the other dharmas that you have become too weak to obey – all of those related dharmas, all injunctions – abandon all of the kinds of meted out prohibitions, and “mAmekaṃ sharaNaṃ vraja” – take shelter only in Me – meaning: I am your Guru; the word of guru is itself “dharma” [highest way]. Follow My directions. The way that I have taught you to do work – do only according to those teachings: “worshipping Him while doing your natural duty” etc. and “go surrender unto Him” etc. – do karma [duty] in that way. The trepidation and fear that you have about however many kinds of sins – I will free you from all of those sins. I will untie all of the types of bondages that you have. Do not grieve any more. Do not any more be despondent with the fear that you will incur sin.
 
So goes the meaning [of “sarvadharma” in this sloka 18:66] relating to life in the world. Now, let us see what the spiritual meaning is according to the yogic scriptures.
 
The five elements such as earth etc. in the five chakras such as Muladhar etc. are called “sarva” [ordinary meaning: all; deeper meaning is in this first sentence and the following explanation]. Sound, touch, sight, taste and smell – these five worldly experiences make up the “dharma” of those elements. Therefore, the experienceable matters of the world are called “sarvadharma” [all dharmas [meaning: all worldly experience]; see third paragraph of the commentary to this sloka 18:66 of the Bhagavad Gita for cross-reference and pertinence of this meaning in contrast to the ordinary meaning]. Furthermore, the ego is the “all” or “sarva” [meaning: all] of the jiva [person], and ego is itself the jiva’s “jiva-ness.” The dharma of that ego is vanity/egotism. Being under the power of that vanity/egotism, the jiva becomes captured by the delusional feelings of “me and mine” etc. And losing all sensibility, thinks of oneself as being different/separate from the Supreme Self or God, and becomes locked up in the worldly experience or samsara. Thus, vanity/egotism is the jiva’s form of “sarvadharma” [everything that one holds on to for support]. “Abhiman” [vanity/egotism] – there are six types of vanity/egotism of action, six types of vanity/egotism of devotion, and six types of vanity/egotism of knowledge. Adding them up, there are eighteen types. That is what has been shown in the eighteen chapters of the [Bhagavad] Gita.
 
And what is “sarvapaap” [all sins]?  But this: all of the karmas [actions bearing fruits] that are created by being related to those “sarvadharma” [see paragraph above] – whether those are good works or evil works, by which one has to experience heaven and such or hell and such – meaning: those that contain the bondage of the experiencing of the fruits – all of those karmas or vanities are “sarvapaap.” “Paap” [sin] means impurity, the restlessness of mind, by which oneself is dirtied, which keeps the Self covered up by the worldly experience, which does not allow one to go beyond the worldly experience, which keeps one bound. The vanity-born karma [acts] keep the jiva tied up in the samsara-bondage in the forms of pleasure and pain. That is why the acts that are related to the worldly experience or born of vanity are called “sarvapaap” [the aggregate of all sins]. The Lord has said, “abandon all dharmas” – meaning: all of the systems of acts that are there that are done by karma-yoga in the five chakras, which purify the elements, appease the gods, where all kinds of material fire-ceremonies are carried out, by which only good accomplishments are gathered, by which powers are attained, by which the threefold vanity or egotism rises up – one should leave all of those worldly-experience-causing karma-yoga matters and the vanity born of egotism, “surrender only to Me” – meaning: according to My words, take up only the thread of Brahman; and through the practice of one’s natural duties such as valiance, power and such, destroy ignorance, egotism and such; and via charity and being in the lordly state, apply “Shambavi” and altogether take shelter in “I”, Kutastha Chaitanya, God. If that is done, that “sarvapaap,” which is tying you up in the bondage of the worldly experience, throwing you into the stupor of the world, and making you experience birth and death again and again – I will free you from that “sarvapaap” [all sins]. Through the fruits of done actions you have experienced a great deal of strife and have become weakened by the bondage of enjoyment/partaking. That is why, here in this period of the sadhana-war, you are thinking that perhaps again you will have to become entangled in that “sarvapaap” and have become overcome by grief. But, if you take refuge in “I” – meaning: turning around the current of desire that has been going in the direction of the worldly experience and placing it in God, Kutastha Chaitanya, in the One without a second “I” Itself – you “mayAmetaṃ taranti” [go beyond Maya]; one goes beyond the power of these Mayic mutations. Therefore, no matter how much the mass of karma is that has been accumulated, when they [the karmas] come forth in the form of prarabdha [previously bound karma] – in the passage of time – not finding that jiva under the rulership of the mutations of Maya at that time and having no place to exist, they [prarabdha karmas] automatically become destroyed. If one remains in the shelter of “I”, one is “nalineedalamambuvat” [like water not staining the lotus leaf] – cannot be touched by sin. Therefore, you have no reason to grieve. Do not grieve.
 
To make it easier for the sadhak [spiritual practitioner] to understand, this spiritual meaning is being now expressed in a practical way.
 
“SarvadharmAn” – the dharma of “sarva” is the state of fragmentation, confusion, the taking on of many-ness. Just by dispelling that “taking on of many-ness,” causes the Indivisible Expanse of “I Am I Itself” to come forth. Take refuge in this Indivisible “I”. If that happens, then that confused, fragmented state of yours – which is the “you” – will disappear. Upon becoming the Indivisible “I”, the ego-state that produces the “me-ness” – that too will disappear. Thus, the inferior karma-yoga of intense ardor, mixed together with “you” and “me,” and the traveling about in the many-ness (in the many forms of “sarva”) – the attainment of non-doing that comes about by the ending of all that, which is the accomplishment of all action (the total annihilation of suffering), Liberation – that Indivisible “I” will bestow that upon you without a doubt. There is no reason any more for your grief.