#### Prose 

तस्मात्प्रणम्य प्रणिधाय कायं
प्रसादये त्वामहमीशमीड्यम् |
पितेव पुत्रस्य सखेव सख्यु:
प्रिय: प्रियायार्हसि देव सोढुम् || 44||
tasmāt praṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṁ
prasādaye tvām aham īśham īḍyam
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥ
priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum

 #### Bengali Translation 

O Lord. Therefore, I put my body down straight and prostrate to You fully so that You, the One Who is the Director of all and the Most Revered, may be pleased. As a father forgives his child’s errors, as a friend forgives a friend, and as the beloved forgives the lover’s wrongs – like this, please forgive my wrongs. 

 #### Commentary 

“Kaya” is the middle part of the body – meaning: the whole area with the spinal column. “Pranidhyaya” [prostration] means to hold the body down in a prostrated position in order to receive blessings from God. This is the process of doing “pranam.” This is a very high process in sadhana [spiritual practice]. This means: upon making the body straight and firm, it has to be thrown down. The meaning of “throwing down” is this: through the guru-instructed process, one has to rise above the five elements; right as one goes above, as mind and body separate from each other, and one thereby takes abidance in Chit [Knowingness], the “praNidhAya kAyam” [prostrating the “kaya” [see first line of this commentary]] happens. (This state/happening is known by oneself in sadhana [meditation].) Upon being settled in this state, through the aid of Atma-mantra, and by putting the mind adjoined with Nada-Jyoti into the Vishnu-ness, the happening of “prNamya praNidhAya kAyam” [bowing the “kaya” in a prostrated position] comes about. This Kriya is above the Ajnachakra; it is a mental Kriya devoid of body-identification. With this Kriya, God is pleased. — Begin Footnote. — That is why Lord Ashtavakra [a sage] has said: “yadi dehaṃ pṛthak kṛtya chiti vishrAmya tiShThasi; adhunaiva sukhee shAnto bandhamukte bhaviShyasi” [if consciousness is separated from the body and you abide in this repose, there will be great contentment and peace, and freedom from bondage]. — End Footnote. — The analogies/similes of making appeasement are of three ordinary types which are also natural [to a human being], such as: a friend to a friend with similar feelings; a lover to a lover, and the way the feelings are for the father in regard to the child. Just as there is no holding onto judgment regarding these wrongs, and just as forgiveness is ever there [in these relationships] – [I ask] You [to] please forgive all of my wrongs in the same way