#### Prose 

साधिभूताधिदैवं मां साधियज्ञं च ये विदु: |
प्रयाणकालेऽपि च मां ते विदुर्युक्तचेतस: || 30||
sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ sādhiyajñaṁ cha ye viduḥ
prayāṇa-kāle ’pi cha māṁ te vidur yukta-chetasaḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

Those who know Me as “Adhibhuta” [knowledge of the phenomena], “Adhidaiva” [knowledge of the realms of the gods] and “Adhiyajna” [knowledge of the yajna [fire sacrifice]; see footnote 10 of this Chapter 7] – they, even at the time of death, remain unified in their consciousness and come to know Me.

 #### Commentary 

The time of death is the ominous time of terror. Chanting, austerities – all such – all of that is really for this time. Before death has fully transpired, the soul of the person takes up refuge in the subtle body. At that time, all of the karma-samskaras [impressions from actions] from the present and other lives come forth and attack the person. And death itself begins to tear apart the connectedness of the parts of the physical body. In this state, the jiva, being extremely restless and utterly confused, loses all comprehension. And so, when leaving the body, the soul takes some samskara [impressed tendency] along with it as the seed of the next life. But the one who is able, through the power of sadhana, to take refuge in the Supreme Self, because that sadhak completely knows “Tadbrahman,” “Adhyatma,” “Karma,” “Adhibhuta,” “Adhidaiva” and “Adhiyajna” — Begin Footnote. — What all of these are – that has been explained by the words of the Lord Himself in slokas 3 and 4 of the next Chapter [8]. See. — End Footnote. — that sadhak, even at the time of dying, does not become overtaken by the suffering of the death-state. At that time, that sadhak’s sadhana-gained “sat-samskaras” [divine tendencies] rise forth automatically, completely dispelling his/her “vishaya-samkaras” [impressed tendencies of the worldly experience], and they make that sadhak’s consciousness pure and immaculate. That sadhak becomes aware of the signs of oncoming death before it happens, and thereby pierces the Kuta above the five elements and ascends to the Brahman-ness at the Sahasrar. In that state, the deathly suffering and the samskaras [impressed tendencies] of the past cannot touch that sadhak. Thus, that sadhak does not get taken aback or lose awareness. The sadhak remains unified in his/her consciousness and attains the Supreme Self. The sadhak blends into Him. If “prayan” [death] or “maran” [death] happens in this state, one attains the destination of the Supreme Self or Brahman. One never has to take birth again.