#### Prose 

बन्धुरात्मात्मनस्तस्य येनात्मैवात्मना जित: |
अनात्मनस्तु शत्रुत्वे वर्ते तात्मैव शत्रुवत् || 6||
bandhur ātmātmanas tasya yenātmaivātmanā jitaḥ
anātmanas tu śhatrutve vartetātmaiva śhatru-vat

 #### Bengali Translation 

The one who has controlled the self by the Self – that one's Self is a friend to his/her self. But the one who is without the Self – meaning: has not been able to bring the self under the power of the Self – that one's self is like an enemy, and holds enmity towards him/her.

 #### Commentary 

In the previous sloka it has been said that the Self is the friend of the self; the self is the enemy of the self. What the signs are when the Self is a friend of the self, and what kind of self is an enemy to the self – that is what is being spoken about in this sloka. The Self of the one who has conquered the senses is a friend. The self of the one who has not conquered the senses is an enemy. The one who, because of the fruit of the performance of Kriyayoga, has been able to stay locked in Kutastha for a long time, knows: “I am not the body”; the 'I' does not have a body as well” - and becomes devoid of the vanity of the body – that is the one who is victorious over the senses. The person who is victorious over the senses is indeed “Mahapurush” [saint; realized being]. It is that being who, by conquering the self by the Self – meaning: conquering the mind by the Mind – becomes a friend to him/herself – meaning: that being abides in the Self in all conditions. That being does not ever have to be separated from the Self and experience disparity. But the one who is not victorious over the senses and has the vanity of the body – that one remains deluded, thinking that the impermanent and unreal are permanent and real, and cannot do the sadhana of “uddhar” [see commentary to sloka 6:5] for him/herself. Being under the power of body-consciousness, that person's behavior is such that: just as an enemy destroys goodness and works on creating evil – that person too, being under the power of ignorance and being in the intoxication of Maya, abandons his/her own natural goodness and believes evil matters to be good.