#### Prose 

अथवा बहुनैतेन किं ज्ञातेन तवार्जुन |
विष्टभ्याहमिदं कृत्स्नमेकांशेन स्थितो जगत् || 42||
atha vā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna
viṣhṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛitsnam ekānśhena sthito jagat

 #### Bengali Translation 

But, O Arjuna! What need do you have in knowing this type of knowledge of the many, as I am holding this entire creation by a fraction [of My Power]?

 #### Commentary 

O sadhak! There is no use in trying to understand that which is beginning-less and endless through the perception of beginnings and ends. Firmly accept that this universe-sheath emerges from Mahattattva. The Infinite Brahman on the Mahat-tattva is just like the reflection of the sky on the water of a pond. In the same way, you, me etc. – the innumerable beings are floating in the Great Brahman. Like the divisions in the ocean on the Earth which is suspended in the womb of space, even though they are called this land-mass, that land-mass, the other land-mass [etc.], within that water everything is united from water to water. But (because of ignorance) there is no understanding of that [water] being one, and an illusion of “many” is there, making everyone look foolish. In reality, just as One is [always] One – it is just like that, my friend! In the Infinite Brahman, in one (Undivided/Unseparated) Part [of the Infinity], the brokenup creation is being perceived through the partitions created by Maya. For as long as the Perception of Knowledge does not come about, for that long does one have to understand the Truth of Divinity through/in separate forms. It is for that long that the “perception of the many” remains. Once the Perception of Knowledge comes forth, then no perception of separation remains. The “perception of the many” also does not remain. The Perception of One, or the Perception of Unity comes about. At that time, this entire creation is directly seen as just a fragment of the Divine. Just as on one part of a human there are different parts and subparts, and hundreds of thousands of hair follicles – in the same way, in one fragment of the Divine, there are millions and millions of universes. He is the Cosmos. There is nothing besides That. That is why it is said in the scriptures: “pAdo’sya vishvA bhootani” [one fraction of Him is the universe and its beings]. Arjuna (the sadhak) has now progressed in the phase of “upasana” [spiritual and devotional awareness], and has become fit to have the Divine Eye opened. That is why the Blessed One (Gurudev) is advising that the sadhak leave behind the knowledge of the many and take up the Knowledge of the One. It is actually from here that “Vishvarupadarshana” [the revelation of the Universal Form] begins.