#### Prose 

न मां दुष्कृतिनो मूढा: प्रपद्यन्ते नराधमा: |
माययापहृतज्ञाना आसुरं भावमाश्रिता: || 15||
na māṁ duṣhkṛitino mūḍhāḥ prapadyante narādhamāḥ
māyayāpahṛita-jñānā āsuraṁ bhāvam āśhritāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

The wrongdoers, the indiscriminate and the lowest of beings are, due to delusion, filled with the murderous and demonic feelings. They do not worship Me. 

 #### Commentary 

Those who are wrongdoers – meaning: those who, instead of doing the practice of the Self, do all kinds of acts that are forbidden by the scriptures – these are the ones who are “dushkrit” [wrongdoers; see first line of sloka above for occurrence of the word]. These wrongdoers, not being able to distinguish between the true and the untrue [or: good and evil], are also “moodha” [ignorant fools; see first line of sloka above] – meaning: they are devoid of the ability to discriminate. For this reason, they are not able to be saved. Having fallen into the circle of Maya, they even forget the scripturally taught teachings – meaning: they cannot grasp and keep the knowledge that is found in the discussions of the scriptures or in the teachings of guru. Thus, they take up the attitudes of arrogance, pride, vanity, anger and other such demonic qualities, and remain deluded in the material things. They cannot grasp the Self-Truth. Only those who are “sukrit” [doers of good] are able to “contemplate on Me” [contemplate on the Self] and thus, they go beyond Maya. Those who are “dushrkit” [wrongdoers] are not able to do so. (See the next sloka.) 