#### Prose 

प्रकृते: क्रियमाणानि गुणै: कर्माणि सर्वश: |
अहङ्कारविमूढात्मा कर्ताहमिति मन्यते || 27||
prakṛiteḥ kriyamāṇāni guṇaiḥ karmāṇi sarvaśhaḥ
ahankāra-vimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate

 #### Bengali Translation 

All actions are taking place via the gunas [operating qualities] of Prakriti. But those whose hearts are deluded by ego – these types of people think “I am the doer.”

 #### Commentary 

In the body, each particular vritti [functionality] has a particular instrument/mechanism dedicated to it. Just as eyes, ears, nose and such are instruments dedicated to the outer vrittis, in the same way the brain is the instrument dedicated to the inner vrittis. Amongst the inner vrittis, there are one hundred types of mental vrittis, and six types of intellectual vrittis. Some of these vrittis are called: attraction, repulsion, aggression; envy, disdain, trepidation; lust, anger, greed; delusion, pride, jealousy; delight, shame, fear; boastfulness, arrogance, vanity; mercy, being enamored, affection; worry, grief, anguish; serenity, determination, discipline; forgiveness, endurance, sense control; giving, meditation, chanting; memory, intelligence, steadfastness; satisfaction, nourishment, contentment; discrimination, detachment, knowledge; pleasure, pain; desire, hope; craving, indulgence; ego, honesty; humility, friendliness, seriousness, magnanimity; courage, boldness; tenderness, devotion etc. The “mastishka” [brain] or “magaj” [brain], is a wondrous thing. It is such a creation by the Creator that although it is made of one basic material, because of its form, size, and the differences in proportions of the sections, as well as the greater or lesser amounts of folds and coils, it is the center, or instrument, that carries out the activities of diverse vrittis. It is because of the differences in the formation of the brain that a person is either good or bad. The more the instruments/tools are that one has in one's brain, the more are the types of activities that one can perform. And again, the level of quality in the formations of each of the instruments/tools leads to the acuteness or weakness in their powers. It is through those instruments that the thing called “I” - or the Self – carries out the activities. Thus, if there are no instruments, the Self cannot carry out the works. Just as: if the eyes, ears etc. become disabled, or if they are not there, one cannot see or hear – in the same way, if parts of any nerves in the brain have any aberrations, or if they are absent, the activities of the vrittis associated with those nerves also do not get carried out. Actually, all of the activities that there are – they all get done through the instruments of the body or the gunas of Prakriti. The Self does not do them. However, it is because of the Self's presence that all of these are able to work. And more: whichever guna takes predominance at whichever time – all of the sense-organs also carry out their activities under the power of that guna. At that time, there is no way the activities of the other gunas can take place. Everyone, sadhak or non-sadhak, knows that if grief and sorrow comes to the mind, at that time, no work, or things that are dutiful or undutiful, can be accomplished. The body and mind become unable to work. When, with the help of enthusiasm, valorous and heroic feelings come about – at that time words of grief and sorrow, or the differences between dutiful and undutiful, find absolutely no place in the mind. The warriors state at the time of war is just like this. Then again, when the mind becomes absorbed in spiritual thoughts – at that time the earthly grief, sorrow, being enamored, affection, the hope of betterment and efforts etc. are seen to be extremely petty. To sum it up: as long as the mind is absorbed in a particular way of thinking/feeling, no effort can turn the mind to another direction for that time. And again, it can been seen that many times the capabilities and efforts of the body are not enough to fulfill a desire of the mind, and the results that come about by doing the necessary work [in order to fulfill said desire] are not satisfactory to the mind. From this it can be understood quite well that Prakriti is truly the predominant one in the matters of activities. The “I” has no primacy [in this]. Still, the prevalence of the ego is such that the sense “I am the doer” automatically rises up in the mind.