#### Prose 

अत्र शूरा महेष्वासा भीमार्जुनसमा युधि
युयुधानो विराटश्च द्रुपदश्च महारथ: || 4||
atra śhūrā maheṣhvāsā bhīmārjuna-samā yudhi
yuyudhāno virāṭaśhcha drupadaśhcha mahā-rathaḥ

धृष्टकेतुश्चेकितान: काशिराजश्च वीर्यवान् |
पुरुजित्कुन्तिभोजश्च शैब्यश्च नरपुङ्गव: || 5||
dhṛiṣhṭaketuśhchekitānaḥ kāśhirājaśhcha vīryavān
purujit kuntibhojaśhcha śhaibyaśhcha nara-puṅgavaḥ

युधामन्युश्च विक्रान्त उत्तमौजाश्च वीर्यवान् |
सौभद्रो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्व एव महारथा: || 6||
yudhāmanyuśhcha vikrānta uttamaujāśhcha vīryavān
saubhadro draupadeyāśhcha sarva eva mahā-rathāḥ

 #### Bengali Translation 

For the [upcoming] battle, master archers and warriors equal to Bhima and Arjuna are amongst these soldiers [of the Pandava side]. See there: Yuyudhan, Virat, the great warrior Drupada, Dhrishtaketu, Chekitan, the valorous king of Kashi, Purujit, Kuntibhoja, Shaibya – one of the greatest among men, the strong Yudhamanyu, the heroic Uttamauja, the son of Saubhadra and the sons of Draupadi are present. All of these [personages] are great warriors.

 #### Commentary 

The spiritual meanings of these names are as follows: 1) Yuyudhan = reverence. Historically, he is the son of Satyaka of the Yadu clan and thus known famously as “Satyaki.” He is capable of fighting alone against innumerable opposing soldiers. During the war of Kurukshetra, upon getting help from Arjuna, [Yuyudhan] killed Bhurishrava, the son of Somadatta. 2) Virat = samadhi (“vi” = gone beyond, “rat” = kingdom). One who gives his kingdom to another to run and remains always aloof/distanced – it is he who is Virat. Historically, he is the ruler of the land of Matsya. It is in his home in which the Pandavas spent their incognito period [during their exile]. He used to hand over the running of his kingdom to his own brother-in-law Kichak and remained always at peace. In the fifteenth day of the war of Kurukshetra, he died at the hands of Dronacharya. 3) Drupada = (“dru” = quick; “pad” = going) the force-power of the omnipresent knowingness within, the electrical power, or the intense and dense force. Historically, he is the ruler of the land of Panchala. Another name for him is “Yajnasena.” Because of being humiliated by Drona, he performed a yajna [fire rite] to get a son who would be capable of killing Drona. From a flame of the fire of that yajna, a dark-skinned daughter came into being. It is she who is Draupadi, the daughter of Drupada. And from the womb of the fire of the yajna, a son came into being. It is this being that is Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Drupada. 4) Dhrishtaketu = control; “dhṛShTAni” [steadiness] = “saṃyatAni” [concentrated together]; “ketanAni” [abode] = “sthAnAni” [place] yasya sah [together is that]. The state in which the places come together – meaning: the Kriya of all six chakras come together. Historically, he is the son of the Chedi king, Shishupal. After Shishupal was killed, the Pandavas asked this man to take on the royal duties. In the war of Kurukshetra, he took the side of the Pandavas and, on the fourteenth day of the war, died at the hands of Dronacharya. 5) Chekitan = remembrance. The word “chiki” refers to crickets. The word “tan” refers to “sound.” This offspring of “chiki” is “cheki” - meaning: the sounds of crickets – that which can be heard by sadhaks after beginning sadhana, before the arising of the Anahata Naad [unstruck sound]. Even very young child-sadhaks [or: novice sadhaks] know about this. 6) Kashiraj = Prajna [inner knowing]; the great revelatory power. He is the king of the city of Kashi. 7) Purujit = pratyahar [yogic withdrawal]; a little rest. 8) Kuntibhoja = asana [seated posture]; “kun” = cultivating. 9) Shaibya = niyama [discipline]; the blessing-bestowing power. 10) Yudhamanyu = pranayam; one whose anger rises up upon just hearing about war. 11) Uttamauja = valorousness/powerfulness [or: potent seed]. 12) Saubhadra = samyama, the coming together and unification of dharana [concentration], dhyan [meditation] and samadhi. 13) Draupadeya [children of Draupadi] = the five bindus, the five types of expressions of the five primal elements.
 
In the Samadhipada of Patanjal Darshan [Yoga Sutras of Patanjali], it is stated: “shraddhAveerya smṛtisamAdhi prajnApurvakaṃitareShAṃ” - meaning: just as the yoga [path of connection] of bhogis, whose minds are absorbed in worldly things of the non-Self, is “bhavapratyaya” [Maya-entrapment-conducive] – meaning: because [those things] are rooted in ignorance, they are the cause of birth and death – in the same way, “itareshAṃ” (for the “others” - meaning: the yoga of those who long for the Divine) are “upAyapratya” [empowerment/pathway -conducive] – meaning: one after another, the five [empowerments] such as reverence, valor etc. come forth as pathways [for freedom]. And “teevrasamvegAnAmAsannah” - meaning: those whose concentrated inner force is intense, they attain perfection (samadhi) through yoga very quickly. As well, it has been said in the Sadhanapada of the same scripture: “yama-niyama-Asana-prANAyAma-pratyAhAra-dhAraNA-dhyAnA-samAdhayohaShTAvangAni” - meaning: there are eight limbs [parts] in yoga such as yama [don'ts], niyama [do's] etc.
 
Those five empowerments/pathways, eight limbs and the intense concentrated inner force, [all of] which are part of yoga – they all have been addressed via the aforementioned names [of the soldiers of the Pandava side]. They are enemies of Duryodhana, who represents the desires of the world. That is why at the start of the war they have appeared in the desire-screen of Duryodhana's chitta. And wanting to destroy them, Duryodhana is calling Dronacharya's (samskaric intellect's) attention to them.