### Prose 
 --- 
अथैतदप्यशक्तोऽसि कर्तुं मद्योगमाश्रित: |
सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं तत: कुरु यतात्मवान् || 11||
athaitad apy aśhakto ’si kartuṁ mad-yogam āśhritaḥ
sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ tataḥ kuru yatātmavān

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
If you cannot even do this, then take recourse in “madyoga” [Yoga of “I”], and thus, become “yatachitta” [union of oneself with all that is], and renounce all fruits of all karma.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The practices that were just spoken about in the previous [verses] – if you cannot do even one of those, then take refuge in My Yoga [or: the Yoga of “I”]. My Yoga [or: the Yoga of “I”] is like this: the space that exists within the brahmanadi – with the churning of that space, a sound comes forth that has no beginning or end. The [sound] that has waves going up and down – that is that which is called “shabda” [sound]; and that [sound] that is steady, without waves and without consonantal stoppages – that is that which is called “naad” [spiritual sound]. When that “naad” arises – that “naad” relieves the effort of churning, takes the sadhak [meditator] to “I” and merges the sadhak with “I”. You too must search. Find out where this waveless “naad” is in you. Put your mind in that “naad” (the Kriya is learned from guru). If that happens, then you will be separated and drawn away from physicality, the sense-organs and the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness], and you will be brought to such a place – a place where you will experience whatever makes up that which is called “all” – [you will know that] you are separate from that, and that you are not taking refuge in anything. Right after this state, you will become one with “I” and become “I”. In this state, no knowing or knowable remains. This is that which is called “madyoga” [the Yoga of “I”]. For as long as you stay in this state, there will be no doing of any karma. Thus, the fruits of karma will automatically go away. So this completes this matter on the subject of “kriyaman” karma [actions done in the present time]. [Now, about previously accumulated karma:] the “sanchit” [previously accumulated] masses of karma that were bearing fruits for you, and were ready to give you [more] fruits – all of those too, like moths flying into the brilliant flame, enter into [this state] and burn to ashes. Because you are no longer within the gunas – as the actions caused by gunas cannot find the samskaric [impression-making] qualities [in this state], they [previous karmic fruits] fall into “nirguna” [no-qualities-state] and become inoperative. And furthermore, as this state is devoid of the functioning of the word “future,” the fear of [future actions and fruits] will not be there. Thus, this practice will make you free of Maya-mutations and make you “Atmavan” [one who abides in the Self]. So, simply do this. 