### Prose 
 --- 
चतुर्विधा भजन्ते मां जना: सुकृतिनोऽर्जुन |
आर्तो जिज्ञासुरर्थार्थी ज्ञानी च भरतर्षभ || 16||
chatur-vidhā bhajante māṁ janāḥ sukṛitino ’rjuna
ārto jijñāsur arthārthī jñānī cha bharatarṣhabha

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharatarshabha Arjuna! The “arta” [desperate], “jijnasu” [seeker of wisdom], “artharthi” [seeker of manifestations] and “jnani” [wise] – these four types of people, who are doers of good, worship Me. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
The people who are “sukrit” [doers of good] are the ones who serve the Supreme Self. And further, these are of four types, perceived according to the kinds of good they do. Those four types, sequentially, are as follows. (1) “Arta” [desperate] – one who is desperate because of illness, grief, fear or the bindings of samsara with its births and deaths – this is the devotee who is “arta.” This person is one who engages him/herself in the service of the Lord just to be free of all of the incendiary pain of samsara. (2) “Jijnasu” [seeker of wisdom] – this is one who desires to understand the nature of things – such as: what is physicality? what is Consciousness? what is the cause behind creation? how does creation happen? what is jnana? what is vijnana? who am I? what is my good? what is my ultimate destiny? Trying to find (discern) answers to these argumentations and other such concerns, this person takes up the service of the Lord. This is the “jijnasu.” This person is higher than the first type, because he/she is not desperate. (3) “Artharthi” [seeker of divine manifestations/opulences] – that by which desire is fulfilled – that is “artha.” Thus, “artha” means [divine] power, or “vibhuti” [divine manifestations/opulences]. “Vibhuti” is Divine. The one who engages in the service of the Lord in order to attain/witness such “vibhuti” - that one is “artharthi” [seeker of divine manifestations]. The “artharthi” is higher than the “jijnasu” because this person knows that the “artha” [richness] or “vibhuti” [divine manifestation/opulence] is Divine, and wants to bring this under his/her own control. (4) “jnani” [wise] – the one who has known what the Self Is, for whom nothing at all remains to be known, the one who has become fully satisfied in the Bliss of the Self, and stays as the Self in the Self – that one is “jnani.” The jnani is higher than all others because this being has no wants at all. (See the next sloka.)