### Prose 
 --- 
लेलिह्यसे ग्रसमान: समन्ता-
ल्लोकान्समग्रान्वदनैर्ज्वलद्भि: |
तेजोभिरापूर्य जगत्समग्रं
भासस्तवोग्रा: प्रतपन्ति विष्णो || 30||
lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāl
lokān samagrān vadanair jvaladbhiḥ
tejobhir āpūrya jagat samagraṁ
bhāsas tavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣhṇo

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
With all mouths flaming, all of the “lokas” [people; planes] are being swallowed and being fully tasted [in the mouths]. O Vishnu! All of Your fiercely intense flames are permeating and burning everything in the entire creation. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
Dear sadhak! Relate this state to the state during your sadhana, and be free of fear. Indivisible time has been bound up with the three divisions of past, future and present only to allow one to perceive changes. If one just slips off of the very subtle present, the changes of the changeable come to an end – meaning: they return to the abyss of the Changeless. That Changeless State is “Vishnu” or the state of Omnipresence. Following the progression of time (at the time of Kriya), when the sadhak sees the changeable [creation] change in that Changeless One due to the appearance of torrential events (meaning: when the sadhak sees the substances of the present from the abyss of the past), then the sadhak feels: “Lo! This changing samsara-universe – it is as if it is entering an incinerating, immense mouth, and it is as if that universe-consuming mouth is chewing and chewing, tasting the taste of the universe and swallowing it into its stomach. 