### Prose 
 --- 
अपाने जुह्वति प्राणं प्राणेऽपानं तथापरे |
प्राणापानगती रुद्ध्वा प्राणायामपरायणा: || 29||
apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpare
prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ
apare niyatāhārāḥ prāṇān prāṇeṣhu juhvati
sarve ’pyete yajña-vido yajña-kṣhapita-kalmaṣhāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Some offer prana into apana and apana into prana, by which, they stop the movements of prana and apana, and become controllers of pranayam. Some others, through “niyatahara” [control of consumption], make prana itself the offering.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Apana abides in the Muladhar and prana abides in the Agya. Apana is downward functioning “vayu” [vital-air]; prana is upward functioning vayu. Apana is restless; prana is settled. These two vayus, residing at the two ends of the spine and having their drawing powers in opposite directions, are trying to pull each to the other's direction. Because neither are able to completely possess the other, their back and forth victories and defeats are going on in the form of exhalation and inhalation. The day that prana loses to the pull of apana – that is the day that the jiva leaves the body [dies]. The technique by which the upper vayu is kept in the lower region and the lower vayu is kept in the upper region – that is what is called “pranayam”*23 (knowledge learned through guru). Those who have mastered that pranayam – it is they who are “prAnayamaparayana” [controllers of pranayam]. When, via pranayam, the movements of prana and apana stop, then there is no flow of exhalation and inhalation. Thus, “ahar” [that which is consumed] – meaning: consuming vayu – becomes “niyata” - meaning: controlled or stopped. In this state, even if the sadhak remains in the womb of Prakriti in the form of Kuta, he/she is not at all touched and defiled by anything from Prakriti. Their [the sadhaks'] entirety is at that time offered from the still vayu into the still vayu. This is why it has been said, “prANAn prANeShu juhvati” [offering prana into prana]. This state cannot be spoken about. This must be understood by the enjoyer who eats from the “thoka” [strike]. — Begin Footnote. — “urdhvashaktinipAtena adhahshakternikunchanat madhyashakti prabodheda jAyate paramaṃ padam.” [dropping the upper shakti [power] downwards, drawing up the lower shakti, the middle shakti is then known and one gains the Supreme State] — End Footnote. —