### Prose 
 --- 
अहङ्कारं बलं दर्पं कामं क्रोधं च संश्रिता: |
मामात्मपरदेहेषु प्रद्विषन्तोऽभ्यसूयका: || 18||
ahankāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ kāmaṁ krodhaṁ cha sanśhritāḥ
mām ātma-para-deheṣhu pradviṣhanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Because of living with egotism, forcefulness, insolence, lust and anger,  and deriding others’ qualities, all of those asura people go about hating Me in their own bodies and others’ bodies.

### Commentary 
 --- 
All of those people of asuric natures, even though they are devoid of good qualities and are stupid, give themselves the high reputation of being knowledgeable and full of good qualities. They say wrongful things about the qualities of others on paths, and, taking recourse in the manifestations of the deepest ignorance – egotism, forcefulness, insolence, lust and anger – become the root cause of all useless things. What to say – they think that all of the women, men, animals and other living beings that have been born – that all of them have been created to do the jobs of providing enjoyments and pleasures for them [the asuras]. [The knowledge] that part of the same One Consciousness resides in the form of “I” in their own bodies and others’ bodies – they do not believe in that. They cannot even think about that. Thus, they hate the residing True “I” in their own bodies and others’ bodies. This is because all of these asura-natured people actually believe that the body is “I”, and their thinking is as if they are the body. That there is an independent Self besides the body, that That is what is meant by the word “I”, and that That “I” is presiding in every body in the same way – instead of [understanding] that, they cannot comprehend at all that nothing besides this body can be called “I”. Thus, whatever actions they take, they think like this: “I am the doer”; “I am the enjoyer.” The residing True “I” that is in their own bodies is hated. And thinking that everything is for their own pleasures, they manifest their hatred for the True “I” in others’ bodies by killing living beings or inflicting pain on living beings. That is why their ritual acts are not according to injunctions.