### Prose 
 --- 
दण्डो दमयतामस्मि नीतिरस्मि जिगीषताम् |
मौनं चैवास्मि गुह्यानां ज्ञानं ज्ञानवतामहम् || 38||
daṇḍo damayatām asmi nītir asmi jigīṣhatām
maunaṁ chaivāsmi guhyānāṁ jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I am the “danda” [lit: stick/staff] of the rulers, [and] the adeptness of those who desire victory. I am the one who is the knowledge in the caves/secret places of the silent knowledgeable ones. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
“DaNDo damayatAmasmi” [I am the stick/staff of the rulers] – among the kinds of tools to use for commanding, “I” am the “staff.” Dear sadhak, take a look. In your body – the sense-organs, the matters grasped by the sense-organs, lust, anger and such – whatever functionalities of the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] that there are – all of these are wild and unruly. The only way of bringing them under one’s command is pranayam. Thus, whatever kinds of tools to command that there are – among them, “I” am that “staff” in the form of pranayam, in Whom all becomes still, where Establishment in Only-ness is attained. Neetirasmi jigeeShatAm – I am the adeptness of those who desire victory. That by which “the other” is conquered – that is called “niti” [adeptness]. The technique of a particular action is also called “niti” [skill; method]. This action is the directing of prana (taught by guru) in the path of the chitta [personal consciousness]. “I-ness” is established in this very thing. The one who wants to conquer Maya – that is the one who is called “jigeeshu” [desirous of victory]. Maunaṃ chaivAsmi guhyAnAm [I am the unspoken-ness/innate silence of the secrets as well] –all of the kinds of secret things that there are in the world – among them, the Satisfaction that comes from Ecstasy in Brahman – that is what is called “mauna” [unspoken-ness/innate silence]. Thus, that “mauna” is “I”. JnAnaṃ jnAnavatAmaham – “I” AM the Knowledge of the Self in the wise. 