### Prose 
 --- 
महर्षय: सप्त पूर्वे चत्वारो मनवस्तथा |
मद्भावा मानसा जाता येषां लोक इमा: प्रजा: || 6||
maharṣhayaḥ sapta pūrve chatvāro manavas tathā
mad-bhāvā mānasā jātā yeṣhāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The seven personages – “Marichi” [an immortal sage] and such – and the four “maharshis” [great seers] such as “Sanaka” [a mind-born sage] from the past, and the personages of the “Manus” [progenitors of humanity] such as “Svayambhu” [the first “Manu”] all get their power from Me and come forth from My Mind – all of these ones from whom all of the participants of creation have been created.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Mahat” is Consciousness/Spirit as it is present within Maya – meaning: “Ishvara” [God as a separate Being]. The one who has attained this state of “Mahat” through the power of sadhana [spiritual practice] – that is the one who is called “maharshi” [the one who has attained “Mahat”]. In this present “Vaivasvata Manavantara” [name of the current aeon], seven beings have attained that state. Their names are: Marichi, Atri, Angira, Pulasta, Pulaha, Kratu and Vashishtha. And in some places it is said that the maharshis of the Vaivasvata Manavantara are: Kashyap, Atri, Vashishtha, Vishvamitra, Gautam [not Gautam the Buddha], Jamadagni and Bharadvaj. The four beings from the primordial times are: Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatkumar and Sanatan. The fourteen Manus [progenitors of humanity] are: Svayambhuva [also called Svayambhu], Svarochisha, Uttama, Tamasa, Vaivata, Chakshusha, Vaivasvata (this Vaivasvata Manavantara [aeon] is the current one), Savarni, Dakshasavarni, Brahmasavarni, Dharmasavarni, Rudrasavarni, Devasavarni and Indrasavarni. All of these ones are born of imagination-power of My Mind – meaning: the particular vritti [functionality] that is called “manas” [mind] — Begin Footnote. —  “Manas” [mind] – to accept. To accept something is “manas” – the power of desire — End Footnote. — that arises within My State of Being, all of these ones have arisen in that Mind. All of these beings are endowed with My State of Being – meaning: they are adepts of My “Vaishnavi” (omnipresence). They are “prajapati” [lords of the created world]. It is from them that the innumerable living beings have spread out throughout creation.