### Prose 
 --- 
द्यूतं छलयतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् |
जयोऽस्मि व्यवसायोऽस्मि सत्त्वं सत्त्ववतामहम् || 36||
dyūtaṁ chhalayatām asmi tejas tejasvinām aham
jayo ’smi vyavasāyo ’smi sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Among the cunning I am the game of “dyuta”; among the “tejasvi[s],” I am “teja”; I am “jaya” [victory] itself; I am “vyavasAya” [enterprise/endeavor] itself; and among the “sattvavAn[s]” [good beings], I am “sattva” [good] itself.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Among cunning acts I am “dyuta.” The activity that is done by betting against an opponent – that is called “dyuta.” This game of “dyuta” is a game of Kshatriya — Begin Footnote. — “KshatAt trAyate iti kshatriya” [one who delivers those who are wounded is called “kshatriya”]. “Kshata” [wound] is “incompleteness” [or: “non-wholeness”]. One who delivers beings from non-wholeness – he is “kshatriya.” — End Footnote. — kings, gambling in which, one loses everything and another becomes victorious. Among all the acts of cunning that are there, because “dyuta” makes one lose everything – this game of “dyuta” is “I”. Dear sadhak! See. The game played by the non-living is called “dyuta.” For as long as there is the restlessness of prana/life – meaning: there is moving about – for that long is there “sarva” [everything]. As soon as your prana became still, you “lost everything.” As soon as you lost everything (that is actually what is known as “being freed from everything”), you immediately became “I”. TejastejasvinAmaham – I am the “teja” of the “tejasvi[s]” [the phrase means: the energy of the powerful; the splendor of the splendid; the Light of the luminous]. Dear sadhak! Rise once again to “Vivasvan” [see commentary to Chapter 4:1-2 of the Pranab Gita]. Now look. All of the fire/light of the moon and the sun, the stars and the constellations, and even Maya’s light [that shows the world] are coming from “I”. Thus, “I” am the “Teja” of “teja” [Light of light].
Jayo’smi [I am victory] – “jaya” [victory] means “where everyone is defeated” [or: “where everyone loses”]. Whatever kinds of operations/activities there are – “I” am the resting place for all of them. Because I am Non-doing, no activity can defeat me. Thus, “I” am “jaya” [victory]. VyavasAyo’smi [I am enterprise/endeavor] – “vyavasa” [enterprise; endeavor] refers to getting and giving [exchange]. Maya, dressed up as Prakriti, takes something from “I” (this taking is actually that which is “samsara”), and then again it gives something to “I” (this is that which is called “pralaya” [dissolution]). This creation and dissolution of Maya – this is happening actually with “I”. Thus “vyavasaya” [the taking and giving] is also “I”. Sattvaṃ sattvatAmaham [I am the goodness of the good] – Those who sport (do sadhana) with sattva guna – they have eight types of states that happen to them. They are: sweating, stupefying, thrill, breaking of breath-flow, vibrating, radiance in the body, tears and dissolution. Dear sadhak! That day when you first went and sat in your meditation posture – go on and remember the sequence of the states of your sadhana from that day onward. Look: at the very beginning, sweat came out [of your body]; because of that, the body became calm, and as the usual tension went away, your body became as if it is stupefied, or unmoving. You were able to sit still. After that you experienced thrills – meaning: your body experienced goosebumps. After that there was a breaking of the breath-flow – meaning: the flow to which the movement of the exhalation and inhalation was bound before doing sadhana – that flow broke and another type of flow of exhaling and inhaling happened in you – meaning: both were actually balanced. With the exhalation becoming the same in proportion as the inhalation, the irregularity/dissimilarity of the flow came to an end. After that, “vepathu” (vibrating/quaking) came about – meaning: through pranayam, the flow of prana became extremely subtle and entered the sushumna, and being hindered by the crude phlegm [in the nadis] – for as long as that phlegm did not become dry through the upward push of prana, for that long did the colliding of the vayu’s [vital-air’s] movement [with the impurities in the subtle passages] shake the nervous system of the body. Right after that ends, the radiance of the body comes about – meaning: because the crude phlegm is dried-up and the path of sushumna is now clear, prana moves unhindered in its subtle and easy flow and awakens the steady and subtle power. Because of this, the radiance and beauty of the body shines forth and a comeliness/softness comes into being. The eyes become dreamy in their gaze. And at that, such a pure, radiant light comes forth – that everyone wants to love [that light]. The look of the body that used to be – that becomes transformed. After this state of sadhana, there are tears. It is as if everything that is of this creation – good, bad, everything there is – it is as if everything is dearest to my heart. Experiencing this, such a wonderful thrill is experienced in the heart that the life-force, filled with joy, intoxicates the heart and tears flow from the eyes (but this is not crying [not sorrowful]). After that, there is dissolution – meaning: the establishment in samadhi. One in whom these [states] have taken their place – that is the one who is called “sattvavan” [the good being]. In “sattvavans,” that “goodness” part is “I”, because it is through the manifestation of this goodness that delusion is destroyed, and one merges into “I”, and becomes “I”.