### Prose 
 --- 
उद्धरेदात्मनात्मानं नात्मानमवसादयेत् |
आत्मैव ह्यात्मनो बन्धुरात्मैव रिपुरात्मन: || 5||
uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ nātmānam avasādayet
ātmaiva hyātmano bandhur ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Take the self by the self and go above. Do not make the self go down. This is because the Self is the friend of the self and the self is the enemy of the self.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The five chakras such as Muladhar etc. are the sporting ground of the five worldly experiences such as sound and touch etc. This is that which is called “samsara.” For as long as the mind stays in this area, for that long does it live as a slave to many vrittis [automatic movements], good and bad. It is for this reason that the mind has to be taken upward through performance of guru-instructed Kriya and made still at Kutastha. This is that which is called “the 'uddhar' [going upward; or: salvation] of oneself.” It is by doing the sadhana of such upward movement that the states of not being able to be thrown off and being unattached come about, and eternal happiness is enjoyed. If one does not do the sadhana of “uddhar” [going upward; salvation], one has to go round and round in the cycle of samsara; happiness cannot be found. That is why it has been said: “nAtmAmasAdayet” [do not bring the self down; see first line of above sloka] – meaning: do not let the self ([in this case] the mind) come down below the Agya – meaning: do not bring it into contact with the worldly experience. If one does not do “uddhar” to oneself [bring oneself up; or: save oneself], another [person] cannot do it [for him/her]. (See the commentary in Chapter 4, sloka 42.) It is with the mind that one has to control the mind – meaning: with the aid of the discriminating intellect, one has to abandon the desires for worldly experiences and turn the mind inward. If one is able to take the mind and pierce the Agya and become mounted on yoga, then one becomes one's own friend. Otherwise, one is one's own enemy. The doer of beneficence or maleficence to oneself is verily oneself; no one else. Guru only shows the goal and the path through the teachings; the practice and the traveling of the path has to be done by oneself. 