### Prose 
 --- 
ईश्वर: सर्वभूतानां हृद्देशेऽर्जुन तिष्ठति |
भ्रामयन्सर्वभूतानि यन्त्रारूढानि मायया || 61||
īśhvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛid-deśhe ‘rjuna tiṣhṭhati
bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni yantrārūḍhāni māyayā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Arjuna! The Lord, through the illusory power of Maya, causes all beings/phenomena to revolve as if mounted on a machine, and He resides in the hearts of all beings/phenomena. (Or: The Lord, who is making all that are mounted on the machine in the form of body – meaning: all of the living beings who are with body-vanity/body-identification – revolve through Maya, is residing in the hearts of all beings/phenomena.) 

### Commentary 
 --- 
In the previous two slokas [verses] [18:59 and 18:60], the Lord spoke about the mechanisms of Prakriti controlling someone/something and the mechanisms of one’s nature controlling someone/something according to Sankhya and such [perspectives]. Now, in this sloka [18:61], He is revealing His own view. He is saying, “All beings/phenomena are instruments of God.” Residing in the hearts of all beings/phenomena, God, through Maya, is making all beings/phenomena revolve. The essential meaning of slokas 59, 60, 61 [all from Chapter 18 of the Bhagavad Gita] is this. O Arjuna! Firstly, you are under Prakriti’s power – meaning: due to the fruits of previously done actions, whatever is going on happening, as well as the kind of structure with which your body is built – you, at the time of acting, are certainly bound to doing actions according to that state of being. Besides that, the way that you have made your body and mind become accustomed to following habits from birth – doing actions other than those habitual actions and actions born of your own nature is impossible for you to do. You are bound to that. Even if you do not want to do it, you will have to do it helplessly against your will. Not only is it absolutely true that the jiva [being] is bound to actions that are of Prakriti and born of one’s own nature, besides that, that Lord Who is the Ordainer of the fruits of actions – it is He Who is Desire-filled. It is by the power of His Desire or Maya that the operations of whatever there is in creation are going on. It is from Him that the beings/phenomena come forth, and by Whom all of this is being pervaded. Him – the One Who resides within all, pervades all, the Person in all hearts – residing in all in the form of the active force, from Brahmaa [the creator] to the end of inert matter – all things, and thereby engaging all beings/phenomena, living and non-living, to their own particular actions. That active force to do works is verily His Maya. Who can escape His Maya? That is overpowering. One has to work under its power. Therefore, you have no escape in any direction. You cannot remain without doing this Prakritic karma [actions]. Therefore (He is saying in the next sloka [18:62]) you “tameva sharanaṃ gacchha” [go surrender unto Him]; take refuge in Him. It is only through His beneficence that you will attain Supreme Peace. You will not get peace by your trying to go to the end of actions by saying, “It is better to eat by begging for alms.”
 
Dear sadhak! Take a look here at your own sadhana [spiritual practice]. In your path of sadhana you travel about in the five chakras such as Muladhar etc. in these five elements: earth, water, fire, air, ether. These are [what is called] “all phenomena.” God, Supreme Self, Supreme God – is in the heart-land of this “all phenomena” – meaning: resides exactly in the center-area of the chakras. The Brahman-space that is inside the sushumna-vajra-chitra [nadis] within the five chakras such as Muladhar etc. – that which is called “brahmanadi” – that is that which is the manifestation of Brahman within “all phenomena.” That is that which is “God.” It is with Its Lordship or Rulership, with Its Recourse, or because of Its Existence that the five elements are carrying out their own particular actions according to each of their dharmas [natures]. And so, the center-area of each of the five chakras of earth, water etc. is actually Kutastha. But because all Kutasthas are of the same thread and are connected to the center of the Ajna-chakra, and because the Enchantress Prakriti’s attractive power is stronger below the Ajna, there is the “ajna” [directive] to keep attention steady on “Ajna[-chakra].” That is why when the word “Kutastha” is used, it means that center-area of the Ajna-chakra. By keeping attention on that Kutastha within the Ajna, and being able to do Kriya according to injunctions, with the mind coming and going in the hearts of all of the heart-lands of “all phenomena” – meaning: within the brahmanadi – is “taking shelter in Him in all ways.”
 
“God is revolving [beings/phenomena] through His Maya” – this being said – Who is this “God”? And what even is “Maya”? Maharshi Patanjali [author of the Yoga Sutras] says, “kleshakarmavipAkAshayairaparAmṛShTah puruShavisheSha eeshvarah” [the one who is untouched by afflictions, karma [duties; actions], post-consuming conditions, and the receptacle of impressions – that special being is “Ishvara” [God]] – meaning: the One Who cannot be touched by the five afflictions such as ignorance etc., karma [dutiful acts] in the forms of righteous and unrighteous ones, the post-consuming condition in the form of fruits of karma [previous actions], and the gathered impressions from the fruits in the chitta [personal consciousness] (“ashaya” [receptacle]) – that Special Person is “Ishvara” [God]. Dear sadhak! What these five afflictions such as “avidya” [ignorance] are – know them.
 
(1) “Avidya” [ignorance]. What is not the thing [being perceived] – that which makes one think that [the wrong perception is true] and brings full faith in that knowledge – that is “avidya.” Like: this creation is impermanent (that which goes away, that which has mutations or change – that is that which is “impermanent”). But it seems to the mind that it [the creation] is permanent and unchanging. Your body has been changing since infancy and has become old – this is mutation/change. And that infancy, childhood, pre-teen period, teenage, youth, and mature-adult states have died (and they will not come back). Yet, you are thinking: “I am growing up. It is as if I am immortal.” This delusional knowledge or false knowledge is called “avidya.”
 
(2) “Asmita” [ordinary meaning: egotism; deeper meaning follows]. That which makes one believe that two completely different things are the same exact thing – that is that which is called “asmita.” Like: the Being is Consciousness and the Enjoyer, and the intellect-essence is material; it is the object of enjoyment. These two are very different things. Even so, that which makes one perceive both as the same – that is that which is “asmita.” This “asmita” is that which is the “heart-knot,” where the two very different things – “I” and “mine” – are continuously thought to be the same due to the power of delusion.
 
(3) “Raga” [affection]. Somewhere I ate a sweet and got pleasure. To want to have that satisfaction of that sweet-eating again – that is that which is “raga” – meaning: the desirous feeling towards – or the hankering for – the enjoyment of the worldly experience.
 
(4) “Dvesha” [repulsion; hatred]. After experiencing a painful experience once – whenever that comes to mind – the feeling of repulsion towards that experience that comes about – meaning: one does not want to experience that again – when this vritti [active condition] arises – that is that which is called “dvesha.”
 
(5) “Abhinivesh” [fear born of a previous cause; fear of death]. I have died in previous lives. I have experienced a very great suffering in those deaths. Because this impression is in the personal consciousness, if someone says “die” – the faint memory of that previously experienced suffering that gathers up fear in the mind/heart – that is called “abhinivesh.” These are the five afflictions.
 
The righteous and unrighteous actions are called “karma.” (See the commentary regarding “karma” in Chapter 8 [of the Pranab Gita].) The fruit of karma is “vipak” [the post-experience/post-consuming condition]. The fruits born of karma that are engraved in the personal consciousness – that is that which is called “ashaya” [receptacle of impressions] or “samskara” [latent impressions].
 
The One Who cannot be touched by these, the One Who is this kind of unattached – that Special Person is called “Ishvara” [God]. He is with gunas/attributes, but is not connected to the operations of the gunas. That is His Specialness. He is Satchitananda [Existence-Consciousness-Bliss] Itself.
 
What Maya is – let us now try to understand that. Ishvara [God] is Desire-filled. His very power of Desire is called “Maya.” Thus, Maya too is desire-filled. This desire-power or Maya is “Avyakta” [inexpressible]. Her form cannot be expressed by speaking about it, because whatever you say will become naught. Nothing will be able to be understood. “Ma” – is a negation-meaning sound, and “ya” - is an existence-meaning sound. That which happens with the union of these two meanings – that is that which is “Maya” – meaning: something that is beyond discernment.
 
The real form of Maya cannot be understood. It/She is inexpressible. But through inference from observing Her activities, the sages have given some works-based names that show the nature of Maya. Like: “sA mAyA pAlinee shaktih sṛShTi saṃhArkAriNee” [that Maya is the ruling power, the cause of the dissolution of creation], “aghaTanpaTiyasee” [who makes that which has not happened [or: does not happen] happen], “sA mAheshvaree shaktih jnAnaroopAtilAlasA vyomasaṃjnA parAkAShThA” [that Supreme Goddess Power is knowledge Herself and desirousness, conscious in the ethers and is the supreme destination] etc. Just as: energy, or that substance, is unseen and no description can be given to it. But when that unseen energy or that substance becomes concentrated and materialized, it becomes expressed and fire comes about; the burning-power comes into being, and with its use, force manifests within substances. The atomic/molecular connections in liquid substances are dispersed and the fundamental elements are separated from each other, and all of the substances become heated etc. It is through such types of activities that whatever can be understood about energy is understood. Similarly: through activities related to Maya, the causal aspect is formed/assumed [in perception]. From this [observation], it can be understood that Maya is endowed with three gunas [primal qualities] – meaning: is Herself the operating power of emergence, sustenance and dissolution. The active state of Maya is Prakriti [phenomenal nature].
 
When this Maya remains merged in Brahman in a state of non-doing – at that time She is “Brahmi Shakti” [Power in Brahman]. The word “anna” [sustenance] means “Brahman,” the “Complete”; that Shakti, Who has Her refuge in that Completeness, is also Complete and thus has the name “Annapurna” [Complete Sustainer].  In the state of non-doing, there is no manifestation of Shakti [Power]. Thus, at that time, She is also “vibhu” (pervading all forms). As soon as She takes up the vritti [active functionality] in the direction of creation, right then the name “Shakti” (birth-giver) is given. Wherever there is Shakti, there is activity. Just as activity begins, right then does the name “Prakriti” happen. Prakriti gave birth to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9; all are separate, fragments, with a sense of “many.” The cessation or retraction of this many-ness is dissolution, prana/life or the void (0). “Birth” – meaning: creation – is expressed, and “consuming/swallowing” – meaning: dissolution – is inexpressible. The names of these two are “birth” and “death.” Those that are born – they are “sarva” [all] (whatever there is). And those that die – they are the ones who are “bhoot” [past] (whatever is gone). (The unexpressed state of “sarva” is “bhoot.” And the expressed state of “bhoot[s]” is “sarva.”) Even if this appears as a change to the eyes of the ignorant, to the eyes of the knowledgeable ones there is only One Brahman that is present, Who is Brahman Itself and the Expanse.
 
That unattached Ishvara, upon mixing with the guna-endowed Maya (the false), and (dressing up as “Brahman with attributes”), and upon residing in the hearts of that “sarva bhoot” (in the middle), is making them be under the power of the cycle of time in the form of birth and death, and is making them revolve.
 
This Desire-filled Ishvara has created this cosmos-universe through the influence of His Desire – meaning: it is He Who has taken on the form of this universe. Just as one seed alone gives birth to a tree, and hundreds of seeds come forth from that tree – in the same way, this universe-tree has come forth from the One Lord, and many living beings have come forth in/from the universe-tree. The Seed of the universe is Ishvara [God]. The universe is a mutation of Maya. And the seeds born in/from the universe are jivas [individual beings]. Just from one Seed of Desire innumerable seeds come forth. Thus, just as God is Desire-filled, so is the jiva [person]. The difference is that God is the refuge of that Desire-Power, and the jiva is the one being sheltered by the Desire-Power – covered in the abyss of Maya. Maya is desirousness itself, action itself, and knowledge itself. To sum it up, Maya is endowed with desirousness, action and knowledge. When Maya, through being transmuted, dresses up as the universe – the Prakriti that is endowed with the 24 elements – then the current of this desirousness-action-knowledge flows. From that desirousness arise: action, the fruits of action, the samsara of action, and the distorted Prakritic consciousness, or the five afflictions. All of these innumerable seeds in the form of jivas that are coming forth from the power of that desirousness – these are structured by those afflictions, actions, post-consuming conditions and impressions in the receptacle of personal consciousness. Ishvara is untouched by all of those.
 
Ishvara has two states – “saguna” [with attributes] and “nirguna” [without attributes]. The nirguna state is called “Brahman.” At that time [of nirguna], Maya or the Desire-power remains one [with Brahman], like butter in milk – meaning: the non-active state. The saguna state is the active state, which is when Maya manifests. The saguna state is “Ishvara” [God being apparent]. Upon going into the state of manifesting, Maya mutates, and that mutation of Maya is that which transforms into the 24 elements and the aggregate of afflictions, actions, post-consuming conditions and the receptacle of impressions. Ishvara is untouched by the mutations of Maya. In the saguna state, Ishvara, being connected with the manifestations of Maya, is the ordainer of the fruits of actions that have come forth from the mutations of Maya. He is Himself Immutable and Non-diminishing. The jivas have come forth from Ishvara; thus, they are desire-endowed. And in that too, the self-determined free will is active. The kinds of actions that the jiva encounters because of applying his/her self-determined free will – the jiva experiences the results/consequences according to that. Those resultant fruits are ordained by that residing Omnipresent Ishvara Who is within all beings. This means: even if one is moving according to one’s own will, the jiva is helplessly forced by the Will of God or Maya to experience the fruits of actions that have been done. For as long as the jiva will go on under the power of his own free will in the path of the worldly experience – for that long will his/her karma [actions bearing fruits] definitely go on being created, and he/she will have to experience the fruits of all of that karma. If the jiva abandons his/her sense of self-determination, turns around that current of independent will and desirousness, puts attention on that Ishvara, and takes refuge in Himself alone, then the jiva will receive the Blessings of Ishvara – as the fruit of that karma [act] of surrendering. The jiva will attain the state of Ishvara, and control Prakriti. The jiva will attain the state of lordship, and will be untouched by those afflictions, actions, post-consuming conditions and the receptacle of impressions. That is the State of Peace – the State of Emancipation. That is why, the Lord is telling Arjuna in the next sloka [18:62], “tameva sharaNaṃ gacchha sarvabhAvena bhArata” [O Bharata [Arjuna], go surrender unto Him in all ways]. — Begin Footnote. — Many people say, “Whatever God is making me do, I am doing only that. What is sin and virtue in that? I am nothing at all. He is verily all.” In one way the statement sounds good, showing signs of devotion. But going to the end of seeing that side, it shows ignorance. Why did creation take place? What is God’s purpose for creation? Why did the actions of sin and virtue come about? “There is no need at this time to argue about ‘why’ and ‘what.’ Whatever God is making us do, we are doing just that. He is even operating the current of thoughts.” This statement is not right. This is because jiva is not self-created; it is not like it has no godly state or godly qualities. The essence of the jiva is not separate from God. In Vedanta it is said, “jeevah brahmaiva kevalam” [the jiva [individuated being] is only Brahman Itself]. The jiva is created as the active effect of the Cause. In the world, it is seen that one type of seed does not produce different types of seeds. From rice there is rice; from barley there is barley; and similarly, from the seed of the animal there is the animal; from the seed of the human there is the human. This has always been so. The relationship of the manifestation to the Cause is always there. In all jivas, it is seen that all seem to desire to live in a state of independence, as well as to work in a state of independence. From where does this desire for independence come? It is here that one has to understand the relationship between the manifested and the Cause. The Cause is the Lord of creation – God, Who controls Prakriti and is Himself Independent. That “independence aspect” of His spreads actively and is “born” [within the jiva] along with the jiva’s birth in the womb of Prakriti. The womb of Prakriti is the kingdom of action. Because the jiva is covered with afflictions, actions, post-consuming conditions and the receptacle of impressions in this kingdom of action, it cannot remain without performing action. Action takes place by the operation of that active aspect of the desire to be independent. God locks the jiva in the fruits of those actions and makes the jiva experience the fruits of those actions. Because this functionality of independence is present, the Lord is teaching Arjuna “svakarmanah tamabhyarchya siddhiṃ vindati mAnavah” [worshipping while carrying out one’s own karma [duty], the human being comes to know perfection] – meaning: while going on experiencing God’s ordained fruits of one’s own ordained actions (the fruits of actions that have been done), one must operate one’s free will, and thereby take up intellectual discernment and, through that, worship Him. If that is done, then there is the attainment of perfection – meaning: by piercing the veil of the afflictions, actions, post-consuming conditions and impressions in the receptacle of personal consciousness – those that are stated by Patanjali – one will attain the State of Independence – the State of Emancipation. If it were like this: that the jiva does not have the functionality of independent will, that the jiva is just a toy, like a puppet, in the hands of God, then the Lord would not have given such a teaching [as is in the Bhagavad Gita]. He Himself would have made [the acts] happen. That is not so. And God is Impartial/Indifferent. He does not have “one’s own” and “not one’s own”; He does not have a sense of good and bad. In the saguna state, He is the form of action and the Ordainer of the fruits of action. It is in that form of being the Ordainer of the fruits of actions that He is making the jiva dance about in the experiencing of the fruits of actions. For as long as the ignorant jiva does not understand this dancing about – for that long does the jiva dance about. Then, upon becoming aware and understanding, the jiva right away grabs a hold of Him. (By grabbing a hold of Him, the jiva gets released from that dancing about, from the madness of the world, and attains Peace.) — End Footnote. —