### Prose 
 --- 
अव्यक्तादीनि भूतानि व्यक्तमध्यानि भारत |
अव्यक्तनिधनान्येव तत्र का परिदेवना || 28||
avyaktādīni bhūtāni vyakta-madhyāni bhārata
avyakta-nidhanānyeva tatra kā paridevanā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
All phenomena (all living beings), in the beginning (before creation) are unexpressed (unmanifested); in the middle (for some time) are expressed (manifested); and after death again become unexpressed. Thus, what is there in this [situation] that is causing you to grieve and lament?

### Commentary 
 --- 
All that are bound to beginning, end and middle are phenomena. Therefore, this bhoga-storing body, the antahkarana, and the activities of the different conglomerates of the arteries, veins, tendons and other channels and such, all using the foundation of the different vrittis – these are all phenomena. What the state is before the arising (the birth) of these phenomena – no one can see this. And what kind of state there is after the ending of their existence (dying) – that also no one knows. These two are inexpressible. Only that middle state between the arising and ending is expressed – meaning: able to be grasped by the senses – a manifestation of the normal vibrating aspect, the activity of the three gunas. This is a Prakritic regularity - “avashyambhAvi” [a “must happen”]. What is there to be sorrowful about in this? Or what is there about which to lament? And see even more: you are “Bharat[a]” (“bha” = luminescence; the Light of the Self; + “rat[a]” = absolutely engaged) – meaning: having directly experienced the Light of the Self during the practice of yoga, you have become enjoined with That, and by the help of that Light, you have seen with the inner perception within the yogic path that: Maya, who is within Brahman, — Begin Footnote. — Just as: although Truth is Real without end, yet one accepts, through imagination, the False which has no reality – Maya being within Brahman is like that. — End Footnote. —the One Who is Unexpressed – Mula – it is from That Unexpressed One that this tri-guna-endowed, twenty-four kalaa-aspected, Prakritic world has been created (see Chapter Fourteen). In Layayoga, all of this, like the way the spider itself draws back within itself the threads of the spider-web, dissolves back into that Unexpressed. Only the middle, active state between the beginning of creation and its end is expressed. Its beginning is that same Inexpressible; its end is also that same Inexpressible. Seeing that everything is in this way, why are you grieving for all of this? Don't. Do not put on the noose of your endearing wishes around your throat. “Pratibuddhasya svapnadṛShTavastuShviva shokah na yujyate” [after awakening, it is not appropriate to grieve over something seen in the dream] – meaning: the person who becomes “pratibuddha” (wakes up after sleep has ended) – just as that person does not grieve over the things seen in the dream-state – similarly, you have also awakened (as the density of ignorance became dispelled through sadhana, you came to know that all of the samsaric scenarios are like a dream, impermanent and illusory/false). In such a situation, it is not fitting for you to grieve.