### Prose 
 --- 
इन्द्रियाणि मनो बुद्धिरस्याधिष्ठानमुच्यते |
एतैर्विमोहयत्येष ज्ञानमावृत्य देहिनम् || 40||
indriyāṇi mano buddhir asyādhiṣhṭhānam uchyate
etair vimohayatyeṣha jñānam āvṛitya dehinam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
All of the sense-organs, mind and intellect – it is said that these are the grounds of desire. It is through these sense-organs and such that desire keeps the discriminating knowledge covered up and keeps the embodied one in delusion.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Releasing and grasping and such are done through the organs of action; seeing and hearing and such are done through the organs of perception; and meditation, concentration or volition and determination and such are done through the mind and intellect. Thus, all of the sense-organs, mind and intellect are the grounds of desire or wishes. Knowledge too is expressed through the sense-organs, mind and intellect. It is for this reason that knowledge and desire are adversaries to each other. When one is dominant, the other disappears. But the particular difference between these two is this: desire, or the wishes for worldly experiences, can find its ground up to the top of the Agya; it cannot go beyond that. But knowledge can. When knowledge is dominant, it illuminates the entire pathway of the sense-organs, mind and intellect, and thereby allows the evident Self to shine forth, making the embodied being the knower/seer of all, and itself [knowledge] extends up to the junction of Maya-Brahman. But, the fact is that desire, or the wish to have, is dominant simply because one is a jiva; there is no doubt about that. This is because this body itself is there only because of desire in the mind. Otherwise one would not have had to be born. Thus, just as fire does not catch on wet wood, in the same way, as long as desire is present, the light of knowledge does not shine forth. This is why the sky of the heart remains covered in the darkness of the worldly experience; the upward directed sight of the embodied one can only see the worldly experience and not the path of the Self. Then desire, in the form of the delusion, brings about waves of the worldly experience in the mind, intellect and the sense-organs, and by deluding the embodied being, makes one lose oneself. It [desire] smears a deluded understanding of the eternal and true with the worldly experience and throws one into confusion.  