### Prose 
 --- 
ज्ञानयज्ञेन चाप्यन्ये यजन्तो मामुपासते |
एकत्वेन पृथक्त्वेन बहुधा विश्वतोमुखम् || 15||
jñāna-yajñena chāpyanye yajanto mām upāsate
ekatvena pṛithaktvena bahudhā viśhvato-mukham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Others too, worship Me, Who Am in all, via “jnana-yajna” [see commentary for definition] in “ekatva” [as the undifferentiated], “prithaktva” [in differentiated ways] and “bahuva” [as the “many”]. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Yajna” means taking one thing and offering it into the fire of another thing – taking the “bel” leaf smothered with ghee, and offering it as oblation in the fire. Just as: when at the end of sadhana [in this case: meditation] the different kinds of knowledge are revealed directly in one’s experience – in the same way, ignorance burns up as a spontaneous oblation in the fire of jnana [Consciousness], and is forever burned to ashes. And one becomes settled in one’s True Form as well. This is “jnana-yajna.” This is most excellent! This brings about the knowledge that there is nothing other than “I”. When this Awareness of One was not there – that is the time there was a universe/cosmos. In this cosmos, there is “many-ness” – me, you, him, her, them, this, that – so many things! The one whose intellect is a little bit more pure than another’s intellect – that very one [with the purer intellect] makes the one with impurer intellect be a worshipper of [the one with the purer intellect], and that impure intellect goes on to worship that person [with the purer intellect]. So in this way, there is the worship of Shakti, Shiva, Vishnu, Ganesh, Sun, Manasa, Makhal, Shashthi, Olabibi – and who knows how many waves of worshipped and worshippers. This is seen. The Thing is actually One. Not understanding that, people confuse everything. When the sadhak first went to guru – at that time, the sadhak did not know anything at all. Immediately prostrating after getting there, the sadhak asked with folded hands [in reverence], “Lord! What do I want? What should I do?” Finding this disciple as a reservoir of innocence, gurudev, who is an ocean of compassion, said, “Child! You have been suffering in the torment of the three pressures of samsara. You want Emancipation, and [you want] that these three pressures can no longer hurt you. You should do these things, the things that I am telling you.” Saying this, [gurudev] took the disciple’s outward-facing vritti [functionality] and brought it to face inward. As soon as the sadhak climbed upon the “Mul Adhar” [the root foundation], immediately did the sadhak find his/her own “Adhisthan” [own place of abidance] (Svadhisthan). Just as “Adhisthan” – meaning: the place to sit – came into being, immediately did the sadhak come to the “Manimaya Pur” [bejeweled city]. As soon as the sadhak arrived at the “Manimaya Pur,” the sadhak immediately saw that there is no fear of being hurt any more. Just as the fear of being hurt left, the “Vishoka Jyoti” [grief-dispelling light] – the light by which the torment of the three pressures is ended – by which grief is ended – shined forth in the Anahata. As soon as the “Vishoka Jyoti” shined forth, immediately was Vishuddha – meaning: purity – attained. As soon as purity is attained, right then there is the end of the ages-long ignorance. Just as ignorance is ended, right then is there the abidance in the Form of one’s Self; that, and the offering of the oblation of ignorance into the “jnana-yajna” are the same thing. Now, understand dear sadhak! What is “oneness” and “differentiated-ness”?