### Prose 
 --- 
ज्ञानविज्ञानतृप्तात्मा कूटस्थो विजितेन्द्रिय: |
युक्त इत्युच्यते योगी समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चन: || 8||
jñāna-vijñāna-tṛiptātmā kūṭa-stho vijitendriyaḥ
yukta ityuchyate yogī sama-loṣhṭāśhma-kāñchanaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The one whose self is fully satisfied in “gyana” [knowledge] and “vigyana” [see commentary below for detailed definitions], who is unmoving and has conquered the senses – for that person a clod of earth and gold are seen as the same. It is that yogi that is called “yukta” [united] (“yogarudha” [mounted on yoga]).

### Commentary 
 --- 
“gyana” and “vigyana” have been explained to some extent in the commentary in Chapter 3, sloka 41. But that is being spoken about once again in order to explain it more thoroughly. Whatever knowledge that comes forth via spiritual teachings/initiation and the practice [of the teachings] – that is “gyana.” Its ultimate level is “Brahman-gyana” [Knowledge of Brahman] or “Atma-gyana” [Knowledge of the Self] – meaning: all is Brahman; I Myself am Brahman – this kind of steady certainty (unwavering settledness). This “Atma-gyana” is that which is called “gyana.” “Vigyana” has two definitions. The prefix “vi” can bring about the meanings of two different adjuncts - “vishesh” [particular] and “vigata” [beyond]. One meaning [of “vigyana”] is “vishesh gyana” and the other is “vigata gyana.” The knowing of each of the 24 elements' principles and the understanding of how they work when mixed and unmixed, and [directly] researching that knowledge – [this is] “vishesh gyana” [knowledge of the particular; applied knowledge]. When, via Kriya, the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] dissolves and everything ends, when no knowledge at all remains, when the knowledge of the substances and the knowledge of that which is beyond the substances all are finished – that is when “vigyana” - meaning: “vigata gyana” [beyond knowledge] – comes about. In this state, it can be seen that “vigyana” [beyond knowledge] and “agyana” [no knowledge] mean the same – meaning: the state of the culmination of “gyana.” The one who has “Prakritic-gyana” (“tattva-gyana” [knowledge of substances] or “vishesh gyana”), “Atmic-gyana” (the knowledge of that which is beyond the substances, or gyana itself), and has known the state where there is no memory of any functionalities (“vigata gyana” [beyond knowledge]) – because that being has nothing left to know, his/her antahkarana is fully satisfied. It is this kind of sadhak that is “gyanavigyanatṛptAtma” [one whose being is satisfied with knowledge and beyond knowledge; see first line of above sloka]. That is why that being is “kutastha” [unmoving] - meaning: because there is not a bit of wavering and restlessness in that person, he/she is changeless, “jitendritya” [victorious over the senses] - meaning: all of the functionalities of the senses are slaves to that sadhak. Because that sadhak has become Complete, and resides in Brahman, the aggregate of that sadhak's senses do not find recourse in anything but Brahman. Thus, they remain in equilibrium. Because “all is Brahman” has happened to that person, a clod of earth, a piece of stone, gold – all have become the same for him/her. The one who has attained this kind of state – that one is Emancipated, or is mounted on yoga.