### Prose 
 --- 
ॐ तत्सदिति निर्देशो ब्रह्मणस्त्रिविध: स्मृत: |
ब्राह्मणास्तेन वेदाश्च यज्ञाश्च विहिता: पुरा || 23||
oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśho brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛitaḥ
brāhmaṇās tena vedāśh cha yajñāśh cha vihitāḥ purā

तस्माद् ॐ इत्युदाहृत्य यज्ञदानतप:क्रिया: |
प्रवर्तन्ते विधानोक्ता: सततं ब्रह्मवादिनाम् || 24||
tasmād oṁ ity udāhṛitya yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ
pravartante vidhānoktāḥ satataṁ brahma-vādinām

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
“OM Tat Sat” – it is said that these are three ways (names) of invoking Brahman. By these, the brahmins, all of the Vedas, and all of the yajnas [rites] were brought about in ancient times (brought into being [from the attribute-less state], or enjoined with attributes). For this reason, acts of scripturally directed yajnas, charity and austerities by those who follow Brahman are always begun by uttering the syllable “OM.” 

### Commentary 
 --- 
Just as: if the [Sanskrit] word “go” [meaning: cow] is said, an animal with horns, tail and loose skin around the throat comes to mind – similarly, “OM Tat Sat” – each of these three words/sounds is a seed (invocation) to bring about the state of Brahman in the mind/heart – meaning: these three are three types of names for Brahman. “Name” brings about the experience of Shakti [Divine Power]. Because the Brahman-Shakti is spoken of as three types, He has these types of names. “OM” means the causal aspect of Brahman; that is verily the Shakti of knowing. “Tat” means the subtle aspect of Brahman; that is verily the operative Shakti; and “Sat” means the physical aspect of Brahman; that is verily the Shakti of things/manifested creation. At the happening of creation, it is from these three states of Brahman – OM Tat Sat – that these three Shaktis, respectively – brahmins, Vedas and yajnas have been created – meaning: the Non-attributed Brahman in the form of OM Tat Sat has made Himself appear with the attributes of brahmin, Veda and yajna. The Non-attributed Brahman is indeed the Non-diminishing State. These three Shaktis of His – observer, observation, observed; knower, knowledge and the object of knowledge; or doer, doing, that which is done – in these forms – are ever existing, or beginning-less and endless. From “OM,” the Shakti of knowing is manifested; that Shakti of knowing is the observer or knower. That is verily “brahmin” and the utterance of the causal aspect. From “Tat” manifests the operative Shakti. That operative Shakti is verily Veda [or: observation] or knowledge, by which “brahmin” or the knower operates. This is verily the utterance of operation. Operation is manifested in causality itself. That is why causality and operation appear as inseparable. From “Sat” manifests the Shakti of things endowed with the five elements. That Shakti of things is verily yajna [rite that brings about fruits], which issues forth different forms of fruits and thereby composes the universe. This is verily the utterance of manifestation. That is why the followers of Brahman (those who discuss about Brahman), at the time of beginning the acts of yajna, charity and austerities, in order to maintain purity and completeness, begin the scripturally directed acts with the utterance of OM, the causal aspect of the act to be done.