### Prose 
 --- 
अथ व्यवस्थितान्दृष्ट्वा धार्तराष्ट्रान् कपिध्वज: |
प्रवृत्ते शस्त्रसम्पाते धनुरुद्यम्य पाण्डव: |
हृषीकेशं तदा वाक्यमिदमाह महीपते ||20||
atha vyavasthitān dṛiṣhṭvā dhārtarāṣhṭrān kapi-dhwajaḥ
pravṛitte śhastra-sampāte dhanurudyamya pāṇḍavaḥ
hṛiṣhīkeśhaṁ tadā vākyam idam āha mahī-pate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
With the innumerable battalions ready to engage [in war], “Kapidhvaja” Arjuna [Arjuna with his banner with the image of Hanuman], upon seeing Dhritarashtra's side ready to fight, raised his bow and spoke these words to Hrishikesh [Sri Krishna].

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Kapidhvaja” - During Kriya, the tongue is turned backwards, and after it goes above the nasal cavity and crosses through the “Shleshma” area, the tip of the tongue has to be leaned and rested a little to the left side (it leans and rests automatically by itself). This is the “Kapidhvaja” state of the sadhak.
 
“Dhanurudyamya” - The spinal column is called “dhanu” [bow]. When one becomes “samaṃ kAyashirogreevaṃ” [body aligned with head and neck – meaning: sitting up straight with the head straight], the spine on one's back becomes a bit bowed [towards the front] in the rear. If the chest is put outwards and the head is held straight up with the chin firmed towards the throat [with the head still being straight; the chin is not pressed against the throat as the head is straight], the spine takes on that kind of form [like a bow]. That is why that type of sitting is called “dhanurudyaman” [bow in a ready position].
 
All of these pravrittis will run to the worldly things as soon as they find the smallest crack [to escape], and, as well [conversely], the nivrittis will take the sadhak in the direction of the Self [when they have the opportunity]. In this way, all of the vrittis remain still. It is this state that has been described as “pravṛtee shastrasampAte” [weapons armed and ready to engage].
 
It is when this state comes about that “Hrishikesh” [Sri Krishna] appears (“hṛSheekA” = the aggregate of the senses; “eesha” = the director/ruler). This means: even though all of the vrittis of the senses are ready to [automatically] carry out their individual activities, the power to rule over them/direct them comes about for the sadhak. At that time, a great wish rises up to see what all is present all around. How that wish is – that is explained in the next few slokas.