### Prose 
 --- 
साङ्ख्ययोगौ पृथग्बाला: प्रवदन्ति न पण्डिता: |
एकमप्यास्थित: सम्यगुभयोर्विन्दते फलम् || 4||
sānkhya-yogau pṛithag bālāḥ pravadanti na paṇḍitāḥ
ekamapyāsthitaḥ samyag ubhayor vindate phalam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Only ignorant persons say that sankhya and yoga are different. The pandits [wise ones] do not speak thusly. The one who practices either one of these two completely – that person receives the fruit of both.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Those who do not perform karma [yogic act], or have not received the permission to enter into karma [yogic act] – even if they are knowledgeable in many scriptures, they are “children” - meaning: ignorant, or scholars who have never practiced. [They are children/ignorant] because they cannot actualize spiritual Truth. On the other hand, those who are “karmis” [performers of the yogic act] – even if they do not have knowledge of the scriptures, because they ascend through spiritual truth after spiritual truth and then directly experience the Primal Cause of the entire universe, they are “pandit[s]” [wise ones]. Those ignorant ones (scholars with no practice) rely only on inference. They just manipulate the language in convoluted ways, and separate this from that, that from another – nothing more. They have no ability to actually go deep and find out directly. But those who are “pandits” [yogis], they see that the water flow of the Triveni [three particular rivers; or: [in yoga -] aggregate of three inner pathways] is the same whether the pathways are seen as connected or whether they are seen as independent. The result from taking a bath and drinking from the united pathways of the Triveni is the same as in the independent pathways. Thus, whichever one it may be, take recourse in one of them [sankhya or yoga] completely – meaning: by surrendering mind and prana [or: surrendering all], purify the inner way (inner place). Now, the path of yoga is the same. The result that comes about when mind is put into prana and then one continually and in every way does “brahmaNyAdhAya karmANi mamanusmaran” [dedicates all karma [practice; or: actions] to Brahman and meditates on “Me” [the Self; the Lord]] [sankhya] – the same result comes about when one crosses Kutastha, goes up to the Sahasrar and, putting mind into mind, merging into the Naad, and becomes extinguished [yoga]. Both are Liberation [or: both result in Liberation]. No matter how it is done, all that matters is that the chitta is merged/dissolved [into Brahman], whether that is done through karma [yogic practice] or through sankhya [awareness]. That is why it has been said “ekamapyasthitah samyak” [take one of them and practice it wholly; see second line of the above sloka].