### Prose 
 --- 
कस्माच्च ते न नमेरन्महात्मन्
गरीयसे ब्रह्मणोऽप्यादिकर्त्रे |
अनन्त देवेश जगन्निवास
त्वमक्षरं सदसतत्परं यत् || 37||
kasmāch cha te na nameran mahātman
garīyase brahmaṇo ’py ādi-kartre
ananta deveśha jagan-nivāsa
tvam akṣharaṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Great Spirit! O Infinite One! O God of gods! O Abode of creation itself! You are bigger than even Brahmaa [creator principle] and are the Primordial Lord/Operator. Is it possible that everyone will not bow to You? You are Indestructible, and You are That which is beyond the existent and the non-existent (That Itself). 

### Commentary 
 --- 
The spider spreads out the web from within itself. Bugs, arachnids, mosquitos, flies [and such] fall into that web. Some escape; some die. And then the spider gathers in that [previously] spread out web into its own body. But there is a resting state before the spreading of the web and after the withdrawing of the web. I am seeing that the case of the progenitor of creation – Brahmaa – is the same. The resting state that is there before creation and after its dissolution – that is called “Hiranyagarbha” [the Golden Abyss; the Golden Womb]. Gold is the king of beauty. One can become entranced by gold when staring at its beauty. In the same way, the universe is filled with immense beauty; whatever you look at – that very thing entrances [you]. The one who, like the spider’s web, holds the universe in the womb/cavern within himself before creation and after dissolution – that is the one who is “Hiranyagarbha” or “Brahmaa.” This huge universe, the breadth of which the mind cannot even fathom – this very universe remains within Brahmaa’s belly. Think about it – how big Brahmaa’s form must be. At the time of rest, the One upon Whom even that Brahmaa rests, how big that resting place or that support of that Brahmaa is, and what It is – forget about mind and intellect [figuring it out] – it is even beyond the comprehension of that Brahmaa himself. Thus, He [the Lord] is “gareeyasa” – even bigger than Brahmaa. On a foundation, the emergence and existence of its tenants takes place (like the sweat-born, eggborn, seed-born and womb-born beings living on the Earth). Thus, the foundation is prior to the tenants and their creator/lord. Because he is the creator and the holder of the universe, the lord of the universe is Brahmaa [creator]. That is why the support/foundation [the Lord] of that Brahmaa has the name of “Devesha” [God of gods]. “Sat” = that which is “vidyaman” [present/known]; “asat” = that which is “avidyaman” [not present/unknown]; “akshara” = One Who cannot be destroyed, That Which cannot be exhausted. “tat” = That Vishnu’s Supreme Beingness; and “param” = Brahman. Dear sadhak! So, let us look at sadhana part; shall we?! “Vidyaman” – whatever there is that you know; “avidyaman” – whatever is not known by you – all of that remains in that Brahmaa and the golden place within his belly (meaning: within the universe and within the sheath of the universe – “Hiranyagarbha”). And that Foundation, for Whom there is not even a bit of change – on Whom everything is and is happening, yet He Who is devoid of diminution or perishing remains as He always Is – That is your One without a second – “tvam” [You]. Thus, that “tvam” is verily “Vasudeva” [the Omnipresent One]. That is why it is being said: “O Great Spirit! O Infinite One! O God of gods! O Abode of creation itself! When You are like this, then if I don’t bow to You, then whom else shall I bow to, Lord?”