### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वस्य चाहं हृदि सन्निविष्टो
मत्त: स्मृतिर्ज्ञानमपोहनं च |
वेदैश्च सर्वैरहमेव वेद्यो
वेदान्तकृद्वेदविदेव चाहम् || 15||
sarvasya chāhaṁ hṛidi sanniviṣhṭo
mattaḥ smṛitir jñānam apohanaṁ cha
vedaiśh cha sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedānta-kṛid veda-vid eva chāham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I have entered into the hearts of all living beings. It is from Me that the living beings have their memory, knowledge and the loss (of these two). I am the “vedya” (the thing to be known) via all of the Vedas. I am the goal of Vedanta and its creator, and I am the knower of Vedanta.

### Commentary 
 --- 
What is meant by “sarva” [all] – they/it have/has two states. One is “saṃghaat” [collision]; the other is “vilaya” [full dissolution]. Upon using discrimination and analysis on these two states, thoroughly and more thoroughly, and then coming to that place where that thoroughness will no longer suffice – that is the place that is called “the middle” or “hridaya” [heart]. “Yato niryAti viShayo yasmiṃshchaiva praleeyate; hṛdayaṃ tadvijAneeyAt manasah sthitikAraNam.” [Bengali translation] “The place from which the worldly experience comes forth, [and] the place in which the worldly experience dissolves, that is that which is called ‘hridaya’ [heart], the heart that is the cause of the settledness of mind.” [End of Bengali translation] There is no place for settledness in anything at all other than “I”. Everything/everyone is restless; only “I” Am Still. Whoever comes and falls into “I”, that one becomes Still. I am present in the hearts of that “sarva” [all], like milk mixed in with water. Taking refuge in Me, verily, the fortunate ones – being Brahman before, and then becoming exhausted in the games of dressing up as a jiva, and then again remembering the state of Brahman before – regain that remembrance, and upon getting the knowledge “ahaṃ brahmAsmi” – I Myself am Brahman – get Emancipation. And the wrongful sinners, caught up in the intoxication of Maya, ruin that memory and knowledge. Both [memory and knowledge, and their loss] are happening on Me, verily. That is why it is being said that the rise and fall of memory and knowledge are in Me. These “sarva” [all] are [attempting to know “I” via] Sama, Rik, Yaju, Atharva – meaning: the object to be known – “I” – via “karmakanda” [the part of the Vedas regarding works], and “jnanakanda” [the part of the Vedas regarding knowledge]. Thus, the final fruit of “vivartavada” [Vedantic assertion] and [the final fruit] of all knowledge – both of these are verily “I”.