### Prose 
 --- 
अथ चित्तं समाधातुं न शक्नोषि मयि स्थिरम् |
अभ्यासयोगेन ततो मामिच्छाप्तुं धनञ्जय || 9||
atha chittaṁ samādhātuṁ na śhaknoṣhi mayi sthiram
abhyāsa-yogena tato mām ichchhāptuṁ dhanañjaya

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Dhananjaya [Arjuna]! If you are not able to still your mind in Me, then endeavor to attain Me through “abhyasa-yoga” [spiritual practice]. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
Unless there is the carried-over benefit of high-level good works from previous lives, it is not possible to automatically still the mind and intellect in the Self without any effort. Practice is necessary. That is why the Lord is saying, “If you are unable to establish your mind in that ‘I’ like I have just said, then, in order to become ‘I’, do the practice of repeatedly uniting the mind [with ‘I’].” See the commentary to Chapter 6, sloka 26. — Begin Footnote. — If one is not able to unite the mind [in “I”] – the practices that the Lord is speaking about from the 9th to the 11 th sloka [of this Chapter 12 of the Pranab Gita] – those are not separate practices/techniques. They are sequential stages in sadhana [spiritual practice]. First: the effort to attain the Self through doing “abhyasa-yoga” [practice of spiritual methods]; second: “matkarmaparayanata” [surrendering all actions to “I”]; third: “madyogashraya” [taking recourse in the Yoga of “I”]; fourth: “yatachittata” [union of oneself to all that is]; fifth: “sarva karmaphala tyaga” [the removal of all of the fruits of all karma]. If there is no “inability” in the first stage, one cannot reach the second stage. It is the same for all of the other stages as well. It is like this: when one moves and moves [walks and walks] and eventually the body droops down and one cannot move any more – the body is unable to move. In the same way, upon continuously doing the work of “abhyasa-yoga,” that same “inability” comes about. That is when “matparayanata” [the surrendering of all actions to Me] arises. Afterwards, when “inability” comes about in this aspect, “madyogashraya” [taking recourse in the Yoga of “I”] comes about. Then when “inability” happens in this part of the work, “chitta samyata” [equipoise] happens. When this state of “samyama” [equipoise with all] comes, all of the fruits of all karma go away, and one attains “Kaivalyasthiti” [establishment in Only-ness]. All of the states of “inability” are experienced directly by oneself in sadhana [spiritual practice]. — End Footnote. —