### Prose 
 --- 
योगिनामपि सर्वेषां मद्गतेनान्तरात्मना |
श्रद्धावान्भजते यो मां स मे युक्ततमो मत: || 47||
yoginām api sarveṣhāṁ mad-gatenāntar-ātmanā
śhraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The one who, with reverential faith, via “madgatachitta” [consciousness in Me], meditates upon Me – that being is the “yuktatama” [most united; most devoted] and dear to Me (dear to My Heart).

### Commentary 
 --- 
That which is most dear to God is the devotee. The one who, having become reverently faithful – meaning: with the longing for Oneness, takes the inner self (the chitta or the reflected consciousness reflecting in the chitta) and puts it, via the performance of [spiritual] yoga into the Supreme Self (the Supreme Reality), then for that devotee, there is nothing that he/she holds on to other than that Supreme Reality. Therefore, meditation/worship goes on automatically in the Self Itself. That is the one who is “bhakta” [devotee]. It is that being who is “yuktatama” [most united; most devoted] – meaning: the highest. This is because: the many kinds of states that happen to yogis – among them, this state is the highest. And it is this devotee who is “abhimata” [as Me] to the Self – meaning: the same as the Self. No difference between that devotee and the Self remains. That devotee becomes the Self. In this sloka, the Lord has indeed bestowed the teaching for the sadhak to be a yogi through performance of “bhakti-yoga” [spiritual yoga with devotion].