### Prose 
 --- 
प्रह्लादश्चास्मि दैत्यानां काल: कलयतामहम् |
मृगाणां च मृगेन्द्रोऽहं वैनतेयश्च पक्षिणाम् || 30||
prahlādaśh chāsmi daityānāṁ kālaḥ kalayatām aham
mṛigāṇāṁ cha mṛigendro ’haṁ vainateyaśh cha pakṣhiṇām

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Among the “daityas,” I am “Prahlad,” “Kaal” among “vasheekari[s],” “Mrigendra” among “mrigas” and “Garuda” among “pakshis.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
PrahlAdashchAsmi daityAnAm [among “daityas,” I am “Prahlad”] – “Prahlad” – “pra” = renown + “halad” = to become “ahladita” [delighted] + “an” [declension]. The one who is renowned for giving delight – that is the one who is “Prahlad.”
 
Daitya [traditional meaning: fallen but powerful souls] – The lineage that has emerged from “Diti” [a mythological woman]. Longing for a son, Diti used to go to make love to Kashyap [a mythological sage] at inauspicious times. Because of that [having sex at inauspicious times], an “asat” [non-good] lineage was born from them. Because “asat” does not actually exist [alternate translation: cannot last], this lineage’s dharma is that of death. At some point in time, some member of this lineage received grace from some saint (Narada), and the “a”  [“non”] was removed. Then only “sat” [good; truth] remained. There is no destruction of “sat.” Vishnu Himself is represented by the word “Sat.” “Hlad” [delight] exists in Vishnu Himself. The person from the lineage of Diti who was representing the delight of Vishnu and presided as such – that is the person who is called “Prahlad.” That Prahlad is – verily – “I”.
 
Kashyapa [see second sentence of above paragraph] – “kashya” means liquor – that which intoxicates. And “pa” means “to drink.” Enter yourself and see the truth of it. When the flow of nectar in the reverse direction intoxicates you – at that time, there is no operation occurring in your antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness]; yet, it is not inoperative either. This state is your state of “kashyap.” When, in this undisturbed state, there is the rising of previously created impressions for the enjoyment of worldly experiences, which sometimes create stirrings in your stillness – that is your state of “diti.” At this time, a little attention goes towards the outer world, and an incredibly beautiful, golden, massive light swallows you up and covers you. This is your state of being “Hiranya Kashyipu” [a mythological fallen yet powerful being who was the father of Prahlad]. The word “hiranya” means “golden,” and “kashyipu” means to be swallowed up. When even this mind-captivating effort by Prakriti to enslave you fails – the beautiful delight that arises in you due to this failure [by Prakriti] – that delight is “Prahlad.”
 
“KAlah KalayatAmaham” [among the spell-casters, I am “Kaal” [time; death]] – “kalyatAm” [means] “vasheekari[s]” [spell-workers]. “Vasheekaran” [spellbinding] can happen through gems, mantras, and elixirs [and such]. Whatever kinds of “vasheekari shaktis” [spellbinding powers] that there are – among them I am that which casts a spell over all - “kaal” [time; death].
 
“Kaal” – the sound “ka” means “Brahmaloka.” The sound “aa” means “atmosphere”; “la” means “Earth.” The universal/subtle sheath is formed by these three. Whatever there is in this universal sheath – all of them are under the power of this very sheath – meaning: creation, preservation and destruction are happening within this very sheath. Wherever anyone/anything may be, that person/thing is operating in that place only; no one has any power/right to move from the place where one is. And even this sheath is established in “I”. Thus, among the “vasheekaris” [spell-casters] “I” am there in the form of “Kaal.”
 
MṛgANAṃcha mṛgendro’ham [among the “mrigas,” I am “Mrigendra”] – “mriga” means “animal.” Among these animals, I am the “mrigaraj” [king of the animals] – the lion (which can be seen in Kutastha). In the inner direction, the word “mriga” means “yancha” [petitioning]. The greatest among “yanchas” is “mumukshuta” [intense longing for God].
 
“VainateyashchapakshiNAm” [among “pakshis” [ordinary meaning: bird; see spiritual definition and explanation below] I am “Garuda” [mythological bird]] – “Vainateya” [means] “Garuda,” who was born of the egg from “Vinata.” “Vinayataa” means one who is very humble. Dear sadhak! See. While doing Kriya, you have two states that come about. One is low; the other is high. When the mind takes the five organs of action, the five organs of perception and the five pranas, and thereby takes up its place in the physical body of five elements in order to enjoy the worldly experience – that is your dark direction – meaning “avinata” [egotistical] state. And when you gather up the externally directed activities and take the bright path in the upper direction – at that time, you take these five organs of perception, five organs of action and five pranas (when you leave behind the waking state of the physical body) and do Kriya in the subtle body – this is your state of “vinata” [humility]. At this time you fall into a kind of dream-like state, and you see a winged, golden-colored bird within the egg-shaped place in the Kutastha. He is “Garuda.” He destroys the “visha” [poison] that is “vishaya” [worldly experience]. That is why his name is “Garuda” (“gar” + “uda”). The word “gar” means “poison.” The word “uda” means casting it away. The one who casts away poison – he is “Garuda.” In this state, the mind is free of the worldly experience and abides in the Sky of Consciousness. “I” too have no “vishaya” [worldly experience; the holder of poison]. And these “bright” and “dark” aspects are also called “paksha[s]” [mystical wings] Those who have “pakshas,” those who travel about in the Void – are “pakshis” [celestial birds]. Among these “pakshis,” “I” am “Garuda” [the One Who casts away the poisonous worldly experience].