### Prose 
 --- 
उपद्रष्टानुमन्ता च भर्ता भोक्ता महेश्वर: |
परमात्मेति चाप्युक्तो देहेऽस्मिन्पुरुष: पर: || 23||
upadraṣhṭānumantā cha bhartā bhoktā maheśhvaraḥ
paramātmeti chāpy ukto dehe ’smin puruṣhaḥ paraḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Even though He abides in the body, Purush is beyond (meaning: He is separate from Prakriti), and therefore, He is the overseer, the consenter/manager, the experiencer and the Supreme Lord, and, it is also said that He is the Supreme Self.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The farmer is the protector of the farm, the overseer of the good and bad of all things related to farming. Remaining close to all of the crops day and night, he/she has the responsibility of protecting the plants from attack by animals such as rabbits etc. But he/she is not able to do that. So, he/she goes and plants into the middle of the field a straw-lump shaped like a [human] doll, with a black pot for a head, with its hands and feet mounted on bamboo. Seeing that horrifying and ugly form, rabbits and such destructive animals do not approach that field out of fear. It is as if the farmer has delegated to that doll the responsibility of looking after the farm. Thus, that doll is the overseer of that farm. It is like this with the activities and causalities of Prakriti. Even though [Purush] is extremely close to the events and still does not have any true contact, the events of actions and causalities are taking place in front of Purush’s eyes. Because of this, He is called the overseer (whether He actually looks or not).
 
That straw-lump doll – as it (even without actually doing anything) drives away the destructive animals from the farming-related plants of that farmer, [in essence] carrying out the work of the farmer, it is called “consenter/manager.” Similarly, even though Purush has no contact with the events of actions and causalities of Prakriti, because He surrounds Himself with Prakriti’s fence, and thereby imagines the entrapment of Consciousness in the physical, and because the operations of Prakriti go on manifesting, Purush becomes the “consenter/manager” of Prakriti.
 
A connection/relationship observed on Earth is this: the sun is up above, and in the pond on the ground floats the lotus. Because the lotus blooms when the sun comes up in the morning and closes when the sun goes down at dusk – just as poets have superimposed the relationship of “husband and wife” on that sun and lotus [respectively] – similarly, [upon] naming impermanence, ignorance, falseness and delusion as “Prakriti” and dressing it up as “wife,” the word “Purush” has been superimposed on the Eternal, Universal Brahman, and through the power of imagination, both have been “wed” and Purush has been dressed up as “lord.” The world is delusion’s home. In delusion’s home, there is only the delusional influence on a delusional household. Thus, there is the superimposition of an imaginary Prakriti imagining an imaginary Purush being an imaginary lord. Truth is the sustainer of the false. Truth is “Brahman” and the false is “Prakriti.” That is why Brahman is the “lord” of Prakriti.
 
“Bhokta” [consumer; experiencer]: “bhuj” = to do “bhojan” [consume] + “tr” (trin) = a sound denoting “doing” – meaning: the one who consumes. Just as darkness goes away automatically at the rising of the sun – in the same way, at the rising of the Knowledge of Brahman, the delusional web of Prakriti automatically merges into Brahman, and because of this, “Brahman is the consumer of Prakriti” – this false statement has been spread around.
 
This extremely incomprehensible and huge sheath of the universe that you are seeing in front of you, which is beyond the capabilities of the human mind to limit – all of this is nothing but the mutations and permutations of Prakriti. And even more, the one who brings about this universe by Her actions and causalities – that Prakriti Herself is so immense, not even a reflection of conception about that can come about in this tiny heart. Because Prakriti is bigger than everything, Prakriti is called “Mahan” [the Great]. The One in Whom She takes refuge and carries out the Rulership of this drama-garland – because that Purush is Her “Ishvara” [God], Purush is called “Maheshvara” [the God of “the Great”].
 
“Paramatma” [Supreme Self] – (the word “para” means “supreme,” and “am” means “only”) – meaning: the One Who is “Only,” “Supreme” and “Atma” [Self]; “AtmA shuddhah svayaṃjyotir vikAree nirAkṛtih” [the Self is the Pure Formless expression of the Self-luminous Light]. So there we have: the One who is “Only” (Alone), “Supreme,” “Pure,” “Self-luminous,” “Ruler” and “Formless” – that is the One Who is “Paramatma.”
 
O Arjuna! With this body, through becoming erroneous due to the error of contact with the phenomena of the activities and causalities of Prakriti (like a fence), Purush became dressed up with these stated particularities [attributes]. If it were not so, what He is – there is nothing left [any more] for you to know [about that] through analysis. Here you have your Prakriti, the mutations of Prakriti, the permutations, and Purush.