### Prose 
 --- 
अधिष्ठानं तथा कर्ता करणं च पृथग्विधम् |
विविधाश्च पृथक्चेष्टा दैवं चैवात्र पञ्चमम् || 14||
adhiṣhṭhānaṁ tathā kartā karaṇaṁ cha pṛithag-vidham
vividhāśh cha pṛithak cheṣhṭā daivaṁ chaivātra pañchamam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
[They are:] the place of the act, the doer, the different causalities, the many types of efforts, and among these, the fifth – is deity. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
(1) “Adhishthan” [place of the act] = that which I have [mistakenly] accepted as “I” – meaning: the body. (2) “Karta” [doer] = the experiencer with attributes – meaning: none of the body, senses, mind and such are “I”; each of these are separate from “I”; but, due to the influence of ignorance (like smearing some paste on space), I have mixed with these as one, and have dressed up as “I” (like: “I am thinking”; when in actuality, I do not think; it’s the mind that thinks; but having mixed together with mind, it is as if I have accepted the idea: “mind is ‘I’”; these states of blending [with the illusory] – this way of being). (3) Five organs of action, five organs of perception, mind and intellect – these twelve factors [together]. (4) “Vividha cheshta” [different kinds of efforts] – the many temporary manifestations due to the attraction, repulsion and union of the 49 vital airs – that which is known as “purushkar” [done by the person]. (5) “Daiva” [deity] means the unseen; or: the fruits of previously done actions, the acts done by gods or providence, and as well, [the word also means] deity. These five are the causalities of the accomplishment of karma [actions or rites]. Among these, the fifth causality – “daiva” – is particularly complex. That can be better understood by examining the subject a bit deeper with an engaged mind.

The effort or endeavor that a human being makes to accomplish some action – that is that person’s “purushkar” – meaning: “kriyaman karma” [work done at the present time, accumulating its fruits for the future]. It is through “kriyaman karma” that one hopes for [desired] fruits, and without “kriyaman karma” there is no fruition at all. But there are several causalities/factors behind kriyaman karma’s bringing forth its fruits. Among those causalities/factors, the first of those causalities/factors is “shiksha” [learning]. Without learning, there is no accomplishing of karma [action]. That learning is of two types. One is the learning from this life, or experience – that which is called the fruits of the “purushkar” of this life, or “samskaras” [impressed tendencies]; and another is the learning that is from previous lives; that is called “purva samskara” [previous samskaras], “prarabdha” [meaning: bound by actions and thoughts in previous lives], “adristha” [unseen], [and/] or “daiva” [ordained; or: of the subtle realms]. (“Purvajanmakṛtaṃ karma taddaivamiti kathyate” [action [bearing fruits in this life but] done in previous lives is said to be “daiva”].) When this daiva, by the name of prarabdha karma, is supportive of kriyaman karma [present action], kriyaman karma is carried out without blocks; and when it is against [kriyaman karma], [kriyaman karma] is full of obstacles. The second causality/factor is “prakritic niyam” [natural laws] – that which is called “devakrita vidhan” [divinely ordained happenings]. When natural law is supportive, good fruits appear from kriyaman karma; otherwise it does not happen. It is like: the ground in which a seed is planted – that ground must be supportive to the seed, and as well, water, sun, air and open space according to the needs of the seed must be there; only then can the planted seed in that ground sprout. And gradually, it can change into the form of a tree and give fruit. But that is dependent on time. That is why time is also a causality/factor. But that [time] is actually part of natural law. This “time” in the forms of “kalakashtha” [ancient temporal divisions] etc. is divided in many ways. In each fragment, time shows different powers, and different transformations. Therefore, time is a significant aspect in the accomplishment of an act. And the third causality/factor is “daiva” or “devata” [deity] that is the ruler of all and the bestower of the fruits of the act. He is in every single kriyaman karma [present action] of the living beings. Examining together the person’s efforts of this and previous lives, natural laws, and the particular aspects of time, He metes out good or bad fruits. He is unbiased in his examination of law. He is all-knowing, all-powerful, non-preferential, and non-selfish. However, He is under the power of the devotee’s devotion to the Supreme. God is a slave to devotion/devotee. He has said in the [Bhagavad] Gita that “varta eva cha karmaNi” – meaning: He is adjoined to acts in the form of the infallible fruits of the acts. His impartial meting out of law is carried out non-preferentially, effectively and strongly even to the devotee doing purushkar [present efforts], not a bit of it is adjusted or made more or less. However, that [devotee] is rescued by the Lord’s Mercy due to the devotion with which the purushkar is being done. Due to the power of that Mercy, the devotee is rescued, as the aforementioned fruits of judgment happen weakly in some places, in some places without fruition, in some places they are diverted from where it is supposed to happen, and in some places the fruit is destroyed – like if a roof is put on, one can block the sun and rain. The meting out of the fruits of that devotion – that is that which is the actual “daiva” [divinely bestowed]. And [the statement] “na cha daivAt paraṃ balam” [[among these five,] the divinely ordained is the most powerful; or: nothing surpasses the supreme power of the divine] refers to that. Now, it is with the aspect of daiva that one has to understand the fruits of judgment given out by the ordainer and judge of the fruits of actions. It is when that aspect is supportive that there is the accomplishment of kriyaman karma [act being done now], the non-accomplishment when the [daiva aspect] is in opposition, and a mixed result when these two are mixed.

Therefore, without effort, or purushkar, the power of the divinely ordained does not manifest. And if the power of the divinely ordained is not supportive, there is no fruit from effort alone. That is why, daiva [the divinely ordained] and purushkar [present effort] are compared to the two wings of a bird. If both are not there, fruits do not come forth.