### Prose 
 --- 
यत्रोपरमते चित्तं निरुद्धं योगसेवया |
यत्र चैवात्मनात्मानं पश्यन्नात्मनि तुष्यति || 20||
yatroparamate chittaṁ niruddhaṁ yoga-sevayā
yatra chaivātmanātmānaṁ paśhyann ātmani tuṣhyati

सुखमात्यन्तिकं यत्तद्बुद्धिग्राह्यमतीन्द्रियम् |
वेत्ति यत्र न चैवायं स्थितश्चलति तत्त्वत: || 21||
sukham ātyantikaṁ yat tad buddhi-grāhyam atīndriyam
vetti yatra na chaivāyaṁ sthitaśh chalati tattvataḥ

यं लब्ध्वा चापरं लाभं मन्यते नाधिकं तत: |
यस्मिन्स्थितो न दु:खेन गुरुणापि विचाल्यते || 22||
yaṁ labdhvā chāparaṁ lābhaṁ manyate nādhikaṁ tataḥ
yasmin sthito na duḥkhena guruṇāpi vichālyate

तं विद्याद् दु:खसंयोगवियोगं योगसञ्ज्ञितम् |
स निश्चयेन योक्तव्यो योगोऽनिर्विण्णचेतसा || 23||
taṁ vidyād duḥkha-sanyoga-viyogaṁ yogasaṅjñitam
sa niśhchayena yoktavyo yogo ’nirviṇṇa-chetasā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The state in which the mind is stopped through the performance of yoga, where it withdraws upward in a special way, and that special state in which the Self sees the Self via the Self and finds contentment in the Self Itself, the special state in which the yogi, having become still, experiences the Endless Happiness which is known with the higher perception and is beyond the senses, and at the same time does not waver from the Self Itself, the state in which, when attained, one does not see any other attainment greater than that, and the state in which, when one settles in it, one does not get moved by great sorrows/pains (dangerous and destructive difficulties [including mental ones]) either – know that state that is devoid of the contact with sorrow/pain to be that which is known by the word “yoga.” One should persevere and practice that yoga with a heart free of despondency.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The state where the fluctuations of consciousness have stopped is called “yoga.” Making the mind one-pointed (see the commentary to sloka 12 [of this Chapter 6]), and practicing Kriya continuously, when all of the tendons and ligaments become filled with vital-air, when the activities of the lungs are accomplished steadily, when there is no restlessness or tension of the body, at that time, even the mind completely relinquishes the association with the five chakras, comes up and settles in the Agya. This is that which is called the state of the stopping of the fluctuations of consciousness. When one comes to this state, because the drawing force from below becomes powerless, by nature itself does the mind automatically become drawn upwards. It goes up to the Sahasrar. The “niruddha” [stopped] (meaning: devoid of the matters of the external worldly experience) chitta goes up to the Sahasrar, and, until it gets to the point of becoming Free, it goes upward through different stages. Each of those [stages] are the particular stages of yoga, or the particular states of samadhi. All of those states are sequentially stated in slokas 20-22 [in this Chapter 6]. Via the practice of yoga (meaning: through the continuous practice of Kriya), when the chitta is stopped, first the chitta attains “uparam” – meaning: because of the finishing of the pull of the magnetism of the worldly experience, the chitta becomes still. One no longer has to apply any other kind of effort to maintain that still state. But because the activities of volition by the mind have not yet been destroyed, a craving remains. Because that craving has not been fulfilled, certain kinds of questioning come into being in order to find out what that is. That is why the “uparam” state is called the “vitarka-avastha” [the state of questioning]. This “vitarka” [questioning] is the first level of sampragyata samadhi. This is called “savitarka sampragyata samadhi” [sampragyata samadhi accompanied by questioning]. Later, as the chitta progresses a little farther, the active principle of volition becomes overcome [by higher states]. At that time, the Self is realized by the Self and a contentment comes to the chitta. At this time, what the difference of the Self is from the Prakritic substance – that becomes ascertained through direct knowledge and the [aforementioned] craving is satisfied. That is why this state is called “vichara avastha” [the state of ascertainment]. This “vichara” is verily the second level of sampragyata samadhi. This is called “savichara samadhi” [sampragyata samadhi with ascertainment]. After this, a happiness ensues. This happiness is beyond the senses – meaning: it is beyond the sense-organs of perception and mind; one cannot know that happiness through any of these – meaning: if the volition-endowed mind is active, that [happiness] does not arise. Therefore, there is no way to explain this happiness through words - “avyakta” [inexpressible]. This is “buddhigrahya” [grasped by higher perception] - meaning: it is experienced through the certainty-endowed vritti [functionality]. And more, this happiness is “atyantik” [beyond the border] – meaning: one who abides as having crossed the “anta” [limit] (the border of Prakriti) is “atyanta” [beyond the border] (the Supreme Self). Because that “atyanta-happiness” knows, and is related to, the  Supreme Self Who is beyond limits/borders, it [the happiness] is “atyantik” [beyond limits/borders] and “ananta” [without end]. It does not end because of the activity of enjoying [as ordinary happiness ends because the activity of enjoying has an end]. And while enjoying, [this happiness] is not dislodged from the Self-Truth. This state of happiness is the “ananda avastha” [the state of bliss] of the yogic scriptures, the third level of sampragyata samadhi. This is called “sananda sampragyata samadhi” [sampragyata samadhi with bliss]. After this, another states comes forth. Attaining that, nothing else remains [to be attained] at all. That is the attainment of attainments – the stillness in “parakashtha” [the Supreme Goal]. This is when the Self abides as the Self in the Self, the fourth and final level of sampragyata samadhi. This is called “sasmita sampragyata samadhi” [sampragyata samadhi with “I”]. After this fourth state is the state of no memory of vrittis functionalities – the state of Non-Knowing born from the ripening of Knowledge reaching its culmination – the state of “Kaivalya” [Only-ness] or Nirvana. At that state, one is not dislodged [from Union] by even the heaviest of pains/sorrows – meaning: then the permutations of Maya do not touch one. Nothing at all is known or not-known. There is no antahkarana [individual consciousness]; so who is there to know? That is why it is called “asampragyata samadhi” [samadhi with no knower]. If one is able to expel the last breath in this state, one attains the Destination of no return. Therefore, the one never again has to become associated with the joys and despondencies which in their aggregation comprise the pain of samsara. That is why yoga is called “duhkhasamyogaviyoga” [the taking away of the association with sorrow/pain]. It is for this reason that this yoga is worthy of endeavor – meaning: everyone must, through practice, master it. Just because there is “ayas” (struggle) at first, it should not be abandoned. In the despondency-free heart – meaning: not engaging in apathy upon experiencing sorrow/pain, but taking the help of the Divinely-provided enthusiasm and perseverance, and with certainty – meaning: “I will do it no matter what” - one has to be diligent and make effort with this kind of strong determination (conviction). When it happens like this, mastery does come about. 