### Prose 
 --- 
सञ्जय उवाच |
एवमुक्त्वार्जुन: सङ्ख्ये रथोपस्थ उपाविशत् |
विसृज्य सशरं चापं शोकसंविग्नमानस: || 47||
sañjaya uvācha
evam uktvārjunaḥ saṅkhye rathopastha upāviśhat
visṛijya sa-śharaṁ chāpaṁ śhoka-saṁvigna-mānasaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Sanjaya said: “Saying this, Arjuna, overcome with terrible grief, threw off his “shar dhanuh” [arrows and bow] and just sat [despondently] on the chariot on the battlefield.

### Commentary 
 --- 
It is spoken about like this [meaning: what is in the sloka] when the sadhak, overcome by grief, throws off his/her bow – meaning: lets the spine slump; [the sadhak] no longer remains straight. Because of the spine no longer being straight, prana (“shar” [arrow]) can no longer climb up an easy and unhindered road; it becomes crooked (it goes in a bad direction). At this time, the sadhak just becomes beset by thoughts (“on the chariot”*)13 and, looking at Kutastha, only sits there quietly. Overcome by troubles in the initial stages of sadhana, every sadhak has to go through this kind of hopelessness due to the intense mire of ignorance. — Begin Footnote. — See the commentary on sloka no. 3 in Chapter 2 for the definition of “sitting on the chariot.” — End Footnote. — Those who are just beginning to progress in the path of sadhana and have not yet received the power to witness the Still Light of the Self upon entering the sushumna, even they can come to know this state [in the above sloka] within a short while after doing some pranayam. This is because: as the practice has not matured, the whole body begins to experience pain and tension, particularly in the knees which feel the need to be massaged; the [sadhak] can no longer stay settled; [the sadhak] straightens the legs, lets the body slump, and, upon becoming somewhat hopeless with the matter of sadhana, [the sadhak] becomes aloof and despondent and just sits there quietly. The kind of despondency that takes the sadhak over in the first stage of yoga – that is what is spoken of here in the first chapter [of the Bhagavad Gita] named “Vishadayoga” [the yoga of being despondent].