### Prose 
 --- 
सिद्धिं प्राप्तो यथा ब्रह्म तथाप्नोति निबोध मे |
समासेनैव कौन्तेय निष्ठा ज्ञानस्य या परा || 50||
siddhiṁ prāpto yathā brahma tathāpnoti nibodha me
samāsenaiva kaunteya niṣhṭhā jñānasya yā parā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Kaunteya [Arjuna]! The way that human beings attain Brahman after attaining perfection, which (the attainment of Brahman) is the highest state of knowledge (the final completion) – know about that in a summarized way from Me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Upon engaging in extremely challenging discipline, and going on practicing the happiness of being in contact with Brahman, a great openness takes over. In that, all of the activities of the senses together with the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] that are carried out while living in this body of nine doors – those activities can no longer find a place in the openness to hold fast. Like coming in one door and going out another, those go out and end up somewhere far from the antahkarana. Thus, no operative power from those can rise up in the antahkarana. The unabated abidance in that activity-free antahkarana is indeed the sadhak’s attainment of non-doing. Just as unattachedness is ever the state in Brahman, it is also so in this sadhak. The attainment of Brahman that is in this way – that is the final completion of knowledge. O son of Kunti [Arjuna], the practices through which this state becomes settled – I will tell you now in summary. Listen. (Chapter 5, sloka 13 [of the Bhagavad Gita].)