### Prose 
 --- 
सक्ता: कर्मण्यविद्वांसो यथा कुर्वन्ति भारत |
कुर्याद्विद्वांस्तथासक्तश्चिकीर्षुर्लोकसंग्रहम् || 25||
saktāḥ karmaṇyavidvānso yathā kurvanti bhārata
kuryād vidvāns tathāsaktaśh chikīrṣhur loka-saṅgraham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharat [Arjuna]! The unwise act while being attached to action. The wise person who intends to do “lokasangraha” [benefit people; or: gathering of planes of existence] should act without attachment.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Those who are operated by mundane intelligence and only pursue their own sense-pleasures, yet, because of not taking recourse in the intelligence of spiritual enquiry, cannot know the true nature of those pleasures – those are the unwise. And those that take up the intelligence of spiritual enquiry, and through detachment leave behind the pleasures of the world and take care to attain the Bliss of the Self – those are the wise. The intense effort with which the unwise perform karma [ordinary acts; or: rites] in desirousness, like: “give me wealth,” “give me children,” “give me fame” etc. - the wise too must perform karma [spiritual act], with exactly the same kind of intense effort, but absolutely without attachment. Then the wise person can do “loka sangraha” [gathering of beings; gathering of planes] - meaning: by drawing up all of the vrittis from all of the locations such as Muladhar etc. through Layayoga [the yoga of merging], the sadhak will be able to attain settledness in True Brahman. — Begin Footnote. — In the way that the unwise perform karma [rites; acts] – being attached because of not knowing the true nature of pleasures due to the lack of a discerning intellect – in actuality only the worldly experience is worshipped using God's name in those acts. And in the results of those rites/acts, the gods of worldly enjoyments are attracted, and because of that happening, one has to be bound up in the worldly experience. The true happiness of the Self is not attained. — End Footnote. — 