### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वाणीन्द्रियकर्माणि प्राणकर्माणि चापरे |
आत्मसंयमयोगाग्नौ जुह्वति ज्ञानदीपिते || 27||
sarvāṇīndriya-karmāṇi prāṇa-karmāṇi chāpare
ātma-sanyama-yogāgnau juhvati jñāna-dīpite

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Other yogis offer as oblations all of the activities of the senses and all of the activities of the pranas into the “gyanadeepita” [knowledge-illuminated] fire of “Atmasaṃyama” [absorption in the Self].

### Commentary 
 --- 
I am, indeed, the “I” - this firm perception is that which is called “gyana” [Knowledge]. Some yogis become steadfastly locked in this gyana, and sitting silently with attention on Kutastha (not paying attention to doing prana-Kriya) and going on continuously meditating on the Self, become firmly established in the True Being of the Self – meaning: upon saturating the mind with spirituality, become Still. This is that which is called “gyanadeepita Atmasaṃyama” [Knowledge-illuminated absorption in the Self]. In “dhyana-yoga” [yoga of meditation], if absorption in the Self happens in this way, the activities of the senses such as seeing, hearing etc. and the activities of the pranas such as inhalation and exhalation etc. all become still, spontaneously. — Begin Footnote. — Just as human beings become overcome by either extremely good news or extremely bad news, in the same way, those who have brought the chitta under control, they become overcome by the Force of the Bliss of Brahman upon simply meditating on the Self, and attain the total state of absorption. This also happens through karma-yoga [yogic practice]. Doing 1728 “chaturthik pranayams” [pranayams with mantra] brings about the state of “dhyan” [meditation]. And the state that comes about upon doing 20,736 pranayams – that is indeed samadhi or “atmasamyama” [absorption in the Self]. In this samadhi, the Knowledge “so'hang” [or: “so'haṃ”] [I am That] comes forth. Once the samsara-believing imagined self experiences this state, no more can the rope of Maya touch that person. That is why the indication for attaining the Great Revelation of Knowledge by offering ignorance into the fire of yoga in the form of “absorption in the Self” has been given. — End Footnote. — 