### Prose 
 --- 
मम योनिर्महद् ब्रह्म तस्मिन्गर्भं दधाम्यहम् |
सम्भव: सर्वभूतानां ततो भवति भारत || 3||
mama yonir mahad brahma tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy aham
sambhavaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ tato bhavati bhārata

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharat [Arjuna]! The “Mahadbrahma” is My Yoni (the womb-place). I place My seed (the seed of the world) in that. It is from that that all phenomena and living beings arise.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The meaning of the word “mama” [see first line of sloka above] is “mine” – meaning: the ego’s. “Yoni” – [means] the place of establishment (the source [place of beginning]). “Mahadbrahma” – “mahat” means “bigger than everything else.” One whose boundaries or beginnings and ends cannot be found anywhere. Even though it is not the Unlimited Great, it still pretends to be unlimited and great, and fools everyone; that is “mahat.” That is why one of its names is “Mahadbrahma,” or “Maya.” There we have the residing place of ego – Maya. I place into the womb of that Maya [My seed] – meaning: it is because I take that Maya into Me that Maya has a womb (the emergence-giving power). This is because: if I do take Maya into Me, then Maya remains closed; She has no power to give birth to anything. When there is a womb in the aforementioned way [in Me] – it is only then that She gives birth to all phenomena and living beings (this creation). There is no creation in Knowledge/Awareness; creation only happens in ignorance/unawareness. That is why, in order to explain the process of creation, “I take Maya (ignorance) into Me” – this statement has to be made. (See Chapter 9, sloka 17 [of the Bhagavad Gita].)