### Prose 
 --- 
नैव तस्य कृतेनार्थो नाकृतेनेह कश्चन |
न चास्य सर्वभूतेषु कश्चिदर्थव्यपाश्रय: || 18||
naiva tasya kṛitenārtho nākṛiteneha kaśhchana
na chāsya sarva-bhūteṣhu kaśhchid artha-vyapāśhrayaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
That sadhak has no need of performing actions in this world; it also does not matter even if he/she does not do anything. In the earthly matters such as sound, touch etc. (even if that sadhak is in them) – that sadhak does not have to experience any types of consequences of sin or virtue [from being in sensory experiences].

### Commentary 
 --- 
The one who is “Atma-Rama” [Delighter in the Self] - that person has no need of karma [acting] or akarma [not acting] in this world. The sadhak does karma [act] in order to have “naishkarma” [state of non-doing]. And the “naishkarma” state is necessary to attain the destination of the Self. But for the Atma-Rama person, the entire creation is filled with the Self. Thus, for that being, karma and akarma are both one and the same. All is One. Because of Completeness, there is no lack; that sadhak has no need[s]. Even if that sadhak goes around in the five elements, he/she does not have to be wrapped up in good and bad fruits. This is because that sadhak's chitta [heart] has become completely pure in the Light of the Self and is filled with the Self, and because of this, that person is like properly churned butter in water, after the buttermilk has been churned out; even while being in the world, that sadhak never becomes blended with the world. It remains pure.