### Prose 
 --- 
अशास्त्रविहितं घोरं तप्यन्ते ये तपो जना: |
दम्भाहङ्कारसंयुक्ता: कामरागबलान्विता: || 5||
aśhāstra-vihitaṁ ghoraṁ tapyante ye tapo janāḥ
dambhāhankāra-sanyuktāḥ kāma-rāga-balānvitāḥ

कर्षयन्त: शरीरस्थं भूतग्राममचेतस: |
मां चैवान्त:शरीरस्थं तान्विद्ध्यासुरनिश्चयान् || 6||
karṣhayantaḥ śharīra-sthaṁ bhūta-grāmam achetasaḥ
māṁ chaivāntaḥ śharīra-sthaṁ tān viddhy āsura-niśhchayān

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
With hypocrisy, and egotism, with desirousness, addiction and expectations – all of those non-discriminating persons torture all of the functional things in the body and even “I” Who am in the body (as the Inner Being), and do intense austerities (those that cause harm to oneself and to living beings) that are not scripturally permitted. Know those beings to be of demonic resolves (doers of extremely cruel actions).

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Dambha” = hypocrisy; “ahamkar” [egotism] = thinking that I am great; “kamaraga” [affinity for lusts] = attachment for getting; “bala” = power – all of those non-discriminating persons who take up these things, and, instead of doing pranayam, do horrifying and bizarre austerities that are not ordained by the scriptures, who, by making the body emaciated, make it weak and incapable, who do not obey My directives – “I” Who am the Inner Self – they even make Me weak – they indeed are the ones with asuric [demonic] natures. The meaning of “they even make Me weak” is this: all of those people are hypocritical and egotistical, and because of having succumbed to lusts, they do whatever is necessary [including forbidden rites] in order to fulfill those lusts. They completely disregard the teachings of the scriptures. Filled with egotism, they think that whatever they are doing and understanding – those are the right things, and no one else really understands anything. Enslaved by this kind of desirousness, their minds become poisoned, and thus, their inner beings are dirtied by thoughts of the worldly experience. Thus, their power of reflecting on anything is ruined; their power of understanding becomes gross [not penetrating]; their power of apprehending goes away, and all of their organs of perception become incapable of perceiving/apprehending anything that is subtle. Because of the antahkarana [inner personal consciousness] having become dirtied like this, the Light of the Self does not illuminate it any more. Gradually, it diminishes. — Start Footnote — In reality, the Self does not diminish. It is Non-diminishing, Imperishable. Just as: when there is light burning in a glass-covered lamp, the light is seen clearly if the glass is clean; but if there is soot in the glass cover, the light is seen outside as weak; if there is a great deal of soot, then the light cannot be seen at all; it can even be thought that the flame in the lamp is out, or without light. But in reality, the flame has not gone out, nor is it without light. It continues to burn with the same intensity in the lamp. The greater or lesser amount of that light’s flame that is perceived outside is only due to the greater or lesser transparency or non-transparency of the glass cover. It is the same in regards to the Self. The purity or impurity of the antahkarana [the whole of mind] or the chitta [personal consciousness] determines whether the Light of the Self is [experienced as] brilliant or weak. — End Footnote. —