### Prose 
 --- 
तत: स विस्मयाविष्टो हृष्टरोमा धनञ्जय: |
प्रणम्य शिरसा देवं कृताञ्जलिरभाषत || 14||
tataḥ sa vismayāviṣhṭo hṛiṣhṭa-romā dhanañjayaḥ
praṇamya śhirasā devaṁ kṛitāñjalir abhāṣhata

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
After that, Arjuna, being astonished, and with thrills running through his body, prostrated his head to the Lord, and with joined palms in reverence and gratitude, spoke. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
Dear sadhak! Now see! When this kind of state comes upon you – at that time the hairs on your body stand on end. That which is beyond the physical eyes, which you have not seen before – because you become full of awe and wonder upon seeing that, the word “vismayAviShTa” [filled with astonishment; see first line of above sloka for the occurrence of the word [with a different declension]] is being used. And because – in this state – you are disconnected from anything that gives rise to birth, death, pleasure, pain, hunger, thirst etc. because you are completely intoxicated in the Cause of the Supreme Deed, you are at that time “Dhananjaya” [victorious over possessions/attachments]. At that time, the movement of your prana and apana take place in such a subtle way that you become unaware of it, and you go up to the head (within the Sahasrar), and abide there like Space in the Immensely Beautiful Sky of Consciousness. That [subtle] operation of prana and apana – that is actually that which is called “pranam” [reverent prostration]. (Going downward once and going upward once is that which is called “pranam” [reverent bowing/prostration]. And that state of abidance of yours – that is that which cannot be expressed by speech. In order to speak of it, one has to come down and speak. At that time, all activities remain still. And at the same time, they are not inoperative either. Yet, the junction of these two – the joining of the left and the right – the left is the adverse way and the right is the way of the Self – the joining of these two is called “sandhi” [junction], and that “sandhi” is being called “kritanjali” [joined palms in reverence]. That Unthinkable, Inexpressible state which, is free of qualities and at the same time endowed with qualities, is the very Foundation of this creation. It is not separate from you [the being], and at the same time, It appears to be separate as well, which is why the term “Deva” [Divine Being as separate from oneself] is being used. And “abhashata” [spoke; see end of above sloka]? After surrendering yourself like that, you cannot just remain without speaking praise. That praise is your “prabhashana” [soliloquy; spoken ovation; speech].