### Prose 
 --- 
अव्यक्तं व्यक्तिमापन्नं मन्यन्ते मामबुद्धय: |
परं भावमजानन्तो ममाव्ययमनुत्तमम् || 24||
avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ manyante mām abuddhayaḥ
paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto mamāvyayam anuttamam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Not knowing that I am the Inexhaustible, Most Excellent and Highest, those without intelligence take Me, Who am Inexpressible, as expressible.

### Commentary 
 --- 
If by making the same amount of effort [as the amount of effort in rites] one gets the Supreme Being, then why does everyone not abandon other gods and engage in the service of the Supreme Self? The reason for that is being spoken about in this sloka. Those who do not have “buddhi” [intelligence] – meaning: those who have not done karma [spiritual act] to go beyond karma [actions and their fruits], and thus have not come to the realm of buddhi in the Ajna-chakra, and thus have not attained the power of discrimination by doing so – their inner vision remains covered. Therefore, the Reality of the Supreme Lord, the Supreme Self that is Inexhaustible (meaning: Eternal), Most Excellent (meaning: the Best of all) and Highest (meaning: beyond Maya) – they [of little intelligence] cannot understand this. What happens by not being able to understand that is this: that even though the Supreme Self is Inexpressible, the ignorant see Him as expressible. This means that even though He is the Formless Brahman [Absolute], for the sustenance of creation, He plays His Sport and becomes the innumerable forms; the ignorant see all of the living forms as ordinary beings. Thus, instead of adoring Him as the One, they worship the different forms as gods. That all of those gods are actually Him – that they cannot grasp as they do not have the perception of Unity. Thus, having become deluded by the enjoyment of the moment, they get impermanent results. They do not receive the Infinite Reward.