### Prose 
 --- 
अर्जुन उवाच |
स्थितप्रज्ञस्य का भाषा समाधिस्थस्य केशव |
स्थितधी: किं प्रभाषेत किमासीत व्रजेत किम् || 54||
arjuna uvācha
sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣhā samādhi-sthasya keśhava
sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣheta kim āsīta vrajeta kim

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Arjuna said, “O Keshava [Sri Krishna]! What are the signs of one who has become “sthitaprajna” [steady in consciousness]. What does that “sthitadhi” [spiritually steady] say? How does that person live? How does that person move/go about?

### Commentary 
 --- 
The vibration-free state that comes about in the state of yoga – when one attains that state – even if one comes down from that state, the mind never again becomes attached to the things of the world as before. The consciousness at all times keeps its attention on the Supreme Self whether moving, sitting, eating, laying [etc.]; the world, as well, becomes gradually more and more filled with Brahman; even while in the waking state, the mind experiences that state of samadhi. And because the Light of Knowledge remains still and steady, this state is called “jagrata samadhi” [samadhi while carrying on life in the waking state]. The person who has this “jagrata samadhi” is the person who is “jivanmukta” [Liberated while living in the body]. The signs of this type of person are asked about through four questions in this sloka. Among these four questions, the first one is of small significance; the other three are of greater significance. Starting with answering the first question in sloka 55, these questions are [all] answered in slokas 55-72. Within these, slokas 56 and 57 answer the question “What does that person in “sthitaprajna” say?” “How does that person live?” is answered in slokas 58, 61, 68 to 70. And “how does that person move/go about?” is answered in slokas 71 and 72.