### Prose 
 --- 
स्पर्शान्कृत्वा बहिर्बाह्यांश्चक्षुश्चैवान्तरे भ्रुवो: |
प्राणापानौ समौ कृत्वा नासाभ्यन्तरचारिणौ || 27||
sparśhān kṛitvā bahir bāhyānśh chakṣhuśh chaivāntare bhruvoḥ
prāṇāpānau samau kṛitvā nāsābhyantara-chāriṇau

यतेन्द्रियमनोबुद्धिर्मुनिर्मोक्षपरायण: |
विगतेच्छाभयक्रोधो य: सदा मुक्त एव स: || 28||
yatendriya-mano-buddhir munir mokṣha-parāyaṇaḥ
vigatechchhā-bhaya-krodho yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Removing all of the worldly experiences of sound and touch and such, establishing the eyes in the middle of the eyebrows, one who merges prana and apana through the nose and brings the senses, mind and intellect under control, and who becomes devoid of desire, fear and anger, and thereby becomes “muni” [sage] by taking shelter in Liberation – that being is Ever-Free.

### Commentary 
 --- 
[The Lord has been saying all along that Liberation is possible through karmayoga [spiritual practice]. That is why, after showing the end result of both yoga and sannyas to be the same – Brahman-Nirvana, He is now specifically speaking about the “dhyanayoga” [yoga of meditation] within karmayoga [spiritual practice].] To not think about worldly experiences is the “removing of the worldly experience within.” This is because if one thinks, the worldly experience enters within. Exactly in the middle of the two eyebrows – where the [symbolic or decorative] spot is placed – one has to still one's sight there. That is what is called “keeping the eyes in the middle of the eyebrows.” At that time, through the guru-instructed method, — Begin Footnote. — “Apana” - meaning: the vayu [vital air] that has the movement of going outside – upon drawing that inward “purak” [deep inhalation; “filling”] (pulling it), because [by doing that] the place of prana becomes contracted, prana automatically falls into apana and, with both of them merging, become yogically united. This is that which is called offering the “havan” [offering into ritual fire] or oblation of prana into apana. Similarly, with the “rechak” [long exhalation] breath, the “havan” of apana into prana takes place. That work should not be done from seeing it in a book. It also should not be done by dressing oneself up as one's own guru. (See the commentary in Chapter 4, sloka 29 [of the Pranab Gita].)  — End Footnote. — prana and apana are merged. When prana and apana are merged, the “yatendriya manobuddhi” [subjugated senses, mind and intellect; see first line of above sloka] etc. come about spontaneously. (One who practices Kriya will know all of those states by him/herself.) In those states, one becomes “muni” [sage; realized being] – meaning: mind becomes merged in the Substance. It is then that the sadhak becomes a “siddhayogi” [perfected yogi]. When such perfection happens, then, in all states – waking, dreaming, deep sleep, samadhi – the sadhak lives in Brahman-ness. Therefore, the sadhak is Ever-Free.