### Prose 
 --- 
एषा तेऽभिहिता साङ्ख्ये
बुद्धिर्योगे त्विमां शृणु |
बुद्ध्या युक्तो यया पार्थ
कर्मबन्धं प्रहास्यसि || 39||
eṣhā te ’bhihitā sānkhye
buddhir yoge tvimāṁ śhṛiṇu
buddhyā yukto yayā pārtha
karma-bandhaṁ prahāsyasi

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Partha [Arjuna]! This knowledge according to [the path called] “Sankhya” is being spoken to you. Now, listen as I speak about the matters of this knowledge according to [the path called] “Yoga,” the knowledge by which, if you become engaged in it, you will be able to be free of the bindings of karma.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Dear sadhak! This method of insight to bring about certainty [in you] that was just taught you – this is verily the path of “Sankhya.” But how that method-knowledge happens in “Yoga” – now listen to that, by which, if you become engaged in it, you will be able to be completely free of the bindings of karma.
 
What is “sankhya” [as in the spiritual meaning of the word, not only specific to the name of the path]? The ascertaining of knowledge of things through analysis is called “sankhya.” In this, the twenty-four substances of Prakriti, and the one Purush – through the “accounting” [sankhya] of these, there is the ascertaining of the essential knowledge/science of the universe. This knowledge is ascertained through a combination of “anuman[a]” [inference] and “anubhav[a]” — Begin Footnote. — “Anu” [atomic] = subtle, “bhava” = to be – becoming the same as the object of perception/knowledge. — End Footnote. — [ordinary meaning: experience; see footnote for spiritual meaning]. This is why the word “sankhya” means “knowledge.” It is like: dissolving the earth element and blending it with the water element and making them “one” is “yoga,” blending water into fire in the same way is [also] “yoga.” Similarly, fire into air, air into space, space into the tanmatras [the source of the senses], tanmatras into the mind, the mind into the intellect, the intellect into the ahamkar [the “I” sense], the ahamkar into the mahattattva [primal element] or the chitta [personal consciousness/heart], the chitta into the Avyakta [the Inexpressible] or the Mula Prakriti [the Original Prakriti], and finally, merging Prakriti into Purush is called “yoga.” But all of the yogas before the last one are nothing but steps to the last yoga. That is why that gradual progression is called “yoga marga/Yoga Marga” [the path of yoga/the path to Yoga], and the final ending of the progression is called “Yoga” [Union]. It is only after he has attainment of this “Yoga” that the sadhak is a “yogi.” And when in the lower stages, [the sadhak] is a “yogabhyasi” [yogic practitioner; practitioner of the path/method of yoga]. Upon having become a yogi, the knowledge that happens if one leaves that [state of “yogi”] and comes down to the lower stages – that is also “sankhya” [ascertaining after coming down]. Therefore, before yoga there is “sankhya” [ascertaining]; after [yoga] it is also “sankhya” [knowing]; the root of yoga is “sankhya” [instruction and inference], and the fruit is also “sankhya” [realization/Liberation]. The “root” [of yoga] that is being spoken about – that is the knowledge that is gained totally by inference. Alternatively, it is instructional knowledge [from guru]. Thus is “Sankhyayoga” [the yoga of ascertaining]. The “fruit” that is being spoken about – that “fruit” is the Knowledge brought about by the practice of yoga - “Mokshayoga” [the yoga of Liberation]. That is the only difference. Otherwise, it is the same thing. All of the things that have been presented in slokas 24 and 25 – those are verily the “understandings according to the way of Sankhya” or knowledge [according to the way of Sankhya]. In this, every aspect of reality from the earth element to the Self goes on being known. But the knowledge that comes from Yoga, because all of the lower stages become merged [into the Uppermost Stage], all of the knowledge from below are completely finished off, and they gradually transform into One at the Top. This buddhi [in this case: consciousness] that faces towards the Self, when one withdraws oneself inward from the worldly experiences, when one becomes United via this buddhi (this can only happen via pranayam alone; its method is learned from the teachings of guru), “prarabdha” [birth karmas], “sanchit” [accumulated karmas] – whatever the bindings of karma there may be – all of them disappear, permanently and completely.