### Prose 
 --- 
अन्नाद्भवन्ति भूतानि पर्जन्यादन्नसम्भव: |
यज्ञाद्भवति पर्जन्यो यज्ञ: कर्मसमुद्भव: || 14||
annād bhavanti bhūtāni parjanyād anna-sambhavaḥ
yajñād bhavati parjanyo yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ

कर्म ब्रह्मोद्भवं विद्धि ब्रह्माक्षरसमुद्भवम् |
तस्मात्सर्वगतं ब्रह्म नित्यं यज्ञे प्रतिष्ठितम् || 15||
karma brahmodbhavaṁ viddhi brahmākṣhara-samudbhavam
tasmāt sarva-gataṁ brahma nityaṁ yajñe pratiṣhṭhitam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
All of the “bhoota[s]” [elements] emerge from “anna” [food]. “Annasambhava” (the birth of food) happens due to “parjanya” (rain). “Parjanya” emerges from yagya. Yagya emerges from karma [act]. Karma emerges from Brahman, and Brahman emerges from  “Akshara” [the Indestructible]. Thus, Brahman, Who is within all, is present in every yagya.

### Commentary 
 --- 
That which is above the “kshara” [destructible] – that is “Akshara” [the Indestructible] – meaning: “Parabrahman” [Supreme Absolute], Kutastha, “Avyakta” [the Inexpressible], within which, and from which, the manifested universe (“kshara” [the destructible]) exists. The place from which one witnesses this is the Agyana-chakra. -- Start Footnote. --  It is in this Agyana-chakra that “ekasthaṃ sacharAcharaṃ kṛtsnaṃ jagat” [the cosmic manifestation of the moving and non-moving is situated in One] is revealed. That is why Srigurudev gives the “agya” [directive] to steady the attention in this place. For this reason the Agyana-chakra is called the “Agya-chakra.” -- End Footnote. -- It is from this “Akshara” that Brahman emerges – that which is called “Veda,” “Shabda-Brahman” [Brahman as sound] or “Pranava” - meaning: the space-element or “vyoma” [ether]. Its [Shabda Brahman's] place is the Vishuddha-chakra. It is from the Shabda-Brahman that “karya-brahman” [Brahman as activity] (prana – meaning: the substance of life) emerges. Prana is itself karma [action] – the one who is called “Mahamaya” in the form of karma [activity]. It is by Her existence that the operation of the  universe-samsara is happening. Her abode is the Anahata-chakra. It is from that activity in the form of prana that makes “yagya” - meaning: the Kriya of “releasing the hold.” Only via the assistance of fire is it possible to release the hold of samsara. Attraction and repulsion etc. takes place [via fire]. For this reason fire is itself the yagya. Its abode is the Manipur-chakra. From the yagya of fire in the form of Kriya, the liquid element emerges, that which is always immersed. Thus it has the name “parjanya”  [rain; rain-god]. Its abode is the Svadhisthan-chakra. The earth-element is created from the liquid/water-element. This earth [element] is itself “anna” [food], because it is the only “adhar” [foundation]. That is why its name is also “Muladhar” [the root foundation], and its abode is also the Muladhar-chakra. It is from the Muladhar in the form of food that “bhoota[s]” (that which goes) - meaning: living beings – emerge. It is when prana enters the covering of the earthen form that a living being is created. That is why it has been stated [in the sloka above] that “bhoota[s]” are born from food. Now – this which has just been said – the process of creation, -- Start Footnote. -- In the original sloka, in order to show the progression of nivritti [spiritual undoing; spiritual withdrawal] in the path of sadhana, the progression has shown as beginning at activity and ending in causality. However, in the commentary, in order to make it easier to understand, the process of creation starting with causality and its progressive spread of activity is shown. -- End Footnote. from the Akshara to bhoota – although all of these are born from the One, because of mutations, they are different and separate in quality from each other. But even within these [aspects of creation] there is a common thing that is prevalent [in all of them]. That is the Shabda-Brahman or Pranava [Divine Sound]. The sound from the space-element is in air, fire, water, earth – it is in all of them, but the sense of touch in the air-element, the sense of sight in the fire-element, the sense of taste in the water-element, and the sense of smell in the earth-element are not present in the ether-element [or: space-element]. On the other hand, it is with the support of the sound of the ether/space-element, or the Shabda-Brahman, that “Akshara” [the Indestructible] and the “Uttama Gati” [the Highest Destination] are attained. “Dhvanirantargataṃ jyoti jyotirantargataṃ manah tanmano vilayaṃ yAti tadviShNoh paramaṃ padam” [within the resonance is the light; within the light is the mind; where that mind is dissolved, that is the Supreme Vishnu-state] – Uttara Gita, Chapter 1, sloka 40.12 Therefore, this Brahman in the form of Sound is within all. And it is ever-present in yagya. This is because: the flow of air that is going on due to the presence of fire at the Manipur, the strikes from that [air] are causing sound[s] to resonate in everything and all the time, proportionately more or less, like a process similar to sound coming forth because of air going into a cone. This is going on ceaselessly. Because the mind stays outside [in the outer world], it is not possible to hear those sounds. But if the mind is taken within, the more one-pointedness there is, the more all of those sounds become clearer and clearer; they can be heard quite well. Ordinarily, if one presses and closes the openings of the ears, a tumultuous sound can be heard; that the common people's proverbial “sound of the fire burning Ravana [defeated demon-king in the Ramayana].” Actually, that sound is really the conglomeration of all of those prana-struck sounds [alternate translation: prana explosions]. When that sound is in the unmixed state [or: state without pranic collisions], that is Pranava. Because this Pranava has no ceasing, it is called “nitya” [endless]. If one takes the mind within, via the yagya of doing pranayam and such on every chakra, then one finds recourse in Brahman in the form of this Pranava, and experiences the witnessing of “Akshara” or “Parabrahman” in the form of Light at the Kutastha. Later, when the mind dissolves in that Light, one attains Stillness at the abode of the Sahasrar. That is the “Parampad” [Supreme Substance; Supreme Abode] or the “Uttam Gati” [Highest Destination.] Thus, the only way to attain that Supreme Substance is yagya [yogic act]. Therefore, yagya or karma [yogic act] is needful work. In these two slokas, if one observes the subjects of the creation and functionality in the six sections of text starting from “annadbhavanti” [existence happening from food] to “samudbhavam” [emerging with] [the text of the above two slokas from the beginning of sloka 3:14 to the end of the first line of sloka 3:15], it can be seen that the direction of the first three sections of text is from causality to activity, and the direction of latter three sections of text is from activity to causality. The central junction point of these different stages is the fire-element residing in the Manipur. The intention of explaining it in this way is this: for as long as the sadhak does not go past the Manipur [in an upward direction], for that long will he/she have to fall to the activity in the lower direction because of the pull of the “vaishayik tamo” [world-directed tamas]. As soon as the sadhak goes past the Manipur [upwards], then immediately – due to the pull of “avaishayik tamo” [non-world-directed tamas] – the sadhak continues to move upwards in the direction of causality. The reason is this: on the bottom side of the Manipur, because the rajoguna [in that region] is of a greater amount, there is restlessness which causes the activities to go on taking place; and on the top side [of the Manipur], because the sattva guna [in that region] is of a greater amount, there is a lack of restlessness which cause the activities to cease and the root causality goes on being revealed. Comparing the greater or lesser proportions of rajas against the proportions of sattva, the second section of the field in the form of the body - “dharmashetra-kurukshetra” [see Chapter 1, sloka 1 of the Gita] - meaning: the path of sadhana – can also be divided into two sections [within this area]. This is because: from the Muladhar to the Manipur, the rajoguna – meaning: restleness (karma [action]) – is proportionately more, and that is why it is called “kurukshetra” (karmakshetra [field of activity]); and because sattva guna – meaning: the tranquil light (dharma [spirituality]) – is proportionately more from the Manipur to the Agya, this region is called “dharmakshetra” [field of spirituality]. That is why: because of the primacy of karma below the Manipur, there is the going on of activities, and because of the primacy of dharma above the Manipur, it is seen that the activities dissolve into the root causality.