### Prose 
 --- 
विषया विनिवर्तन्ते निराहारस्य देहिन: |
रसवर्जं रसोऽप्यस्य परं दृष्ट्वा निवर्तते || 59||
viṣhayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ
rasa-varjaṁ raso ’pyasya paraṁ dṛiṣhṭvā nivartate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
For the embodied person who lives without “ahar” [dining; food], there is only the withdrawal of worldly experiences, [but] the desire to enjoy worldly experiences remains. However, for the sadhak, because of having seen the Supreme (Vishnu-Being), even the desire to enjoy is withdrawn.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Having worldly experiences through the senses is that which is called “ahar” [dining; food]. This “ahar” is not there [the practitioner is fasting], yet the vanity of the body is there – meaning: “I am embodied/I am the body” - the mind has this understanding. For this type of sadhak, there is the casting off of worldly experiences such as sound and touch etc.; this is true (this is because the natural result of the yogic act is that one goes above and experiences a type of samadhi — Begin Footnote. — The way that the traveling-show people hold their breaths in a near-death state during the female juggler's tricks – that is this type of samadhi. — End Footnote. — where one loses all awareness of the worldly experience); but because of being tied up by the bindings of body-vanity, that person's intellect does not get established [in Spirit]. Thus, that person cannot forget the taste of the enjoyments of the world. As soon as he/she sees the matters of enjoyment, the desires immediately rise up in the mind. But the one who has attained the state of Vishnu through Layayoga – because that sadhak's sky of inner consciousness is always floating in the Fire of Brahman (Luminosity), no other light/energy take place there. Thus, nothing of the world-experience remains for that sadhak; even the desire to taste such does not remain.