### Prose 
 --- 
प्रकृतेर्गुणसम्मूढा: सज्जन्ते गुणकर्मसु |
तानकृत्स्नविदो मन्दान्कृत्स्नविन्न विचालयेत् || 29||
prakṛiter guṇa-sammūḍhāḥ sajjante guṇa-karmasu
tān akṛitsna-vido mandān kṛitsna-vin na vichālayet

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Those persons who, taken over by the vanity of the body and feeling the vanity of doership of the activities of sound and touch and such, They are “akritsnavit” [persons with incomplete knowledge] and are “manda” [not good]. The “kritsnavit” [one with complete knowledge] (knower of everything) does not disturb them.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The one who knows “kritsna” (the universe) – he/she is “kritsnavit” - God (Kutastha Chaitanya); and the “akritsnavit” [one who does not know the whole] is jiva. — Begin Footnote. — The one who has forgotten his/her Self because of being under the power of ignorance, the one who is the ruler of this body, the one who is the holder of all of the pranas, the one who, even after having being known by the name “consciousness,” is still one of little knowledge – that person is “jiva.” — End Footnote. — The jiva who is “manda” [not good] – meaning: lazy, lethargic – if that person, on top of that becomes engaged in the enjoyments of the world through sound, touch and such – if that happens, then the Lord does not disturb that person – meaning: “mṛtyusaṃsArasAgarat samuddhartA” [the Savior from all of the ocean of samsara-death] – God – Kutastha Purush – does not guide that person. He does not dispel the inner darkness of that person by the Revelation of the Light of Consciousness, and does not show that person the path. That person goes about according to his/her own will and goes on spinning round and round in the worldly experience. — Begin Footnote. — For as long as there is the sense of doership and there is no surrender of oneself to the Lord, the Lord does not take on the responsibility [for the soul] for that long. As soon as surrender takes place, He immediately takes on the responsibility. When her garment was being ripped off, for as long as Draupadi was holding on to her garment and calling Sri Krishna for help, Sri Krishna did not go to help during that time. As soon as she let go of her garment, threw up her arms and completely surrendered to Sri Krishna, He immediately appeared within her and became the garment itself and saved her. [The full account is written in the Mahabharata.] — End Footnote. —