### Prose 
 --- 
श्रोत्रादीनीन्द्रियाण्यन्ये संयमाग्निषु जुह्वति |
शब्दादीन्विषयानन्य इन्द्रियाग्निषु जुह्वति || 26||
śhrotrādīnīndriyāṇyanye sanyamāgniṣhu juhvati
śhabdādīn viṣhayānanya indriyāgniṣhu juhvati

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Some offer the controlling of the senses such as hearing etc. as oblation into the fire. Some offer the worldly experience such as sound etc. in the form of the senses as oblation into the fire.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Before giving oblations to the Self in the Fire of Brahman, the sadhak, with the aid of the Light of the Self, becomes a witness of the extremely subtle. At that time within, the sadhak directly sees the extremely subtle causes of the emergence of all of the senses, their establishing, and their transformations. At that time, if, instead of giving oblations to the Self in the Fire of Brahman – meaning: instead of extinguishing oneself in Oneself, one brings all of those causalities under one's own control, and if one stays stuck to the state of settledness – if that happens, the state of “samyama” comes about for the sadhak. At that time, the sadhak becomes the seer of everything. At that time, the sadhak sees that, within his/her Mayic-body, all of the senses such as the ears etc. no longer get the power of activity from her [Maya], and thereby, being in a state of non-activity, they fall into the fire of that samyama, are merged together and take on the form of fire. (This is the offering of the senses into the fire of samyama.) And all of the worldly experiences such as sound etc., which are perceived by the senses such as hearing etc., come to that fire of the controlled senses, fall into it and themselves get destroyed. They [the worldly experiences] cannot reactivate the senses. (This is the offering of the worldly experience into the fire of the senses.) The sadhak sees even more: that all of the parts in his/her antahkarana are still there, but none of them are active any more. All of them are in a state of non-activity. In this state, because there is not even a trace of attachment, the guna-endowed Maya loses to the sadhak. All of the activities of all of the gunas take rest [or: end]. 