### Prose 
 --- 
अर्जुन उवाच |
परं ब्रह्म परं धाम पवित्रं परमं भवान् |
पुरुषं शाश्वतं दिव्यमादिदेवमजं विभुम् || 12||
arjuna uvācha
paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān
puruṣhaṁ śhāśhvataṁ divyam ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum

आहुस्त्वामृषय: सर्वे देवर्षिर्नारदस्तथा |
असितो देवलो व्यास: स्वयं चैव ब्रवीषि मे || 13||
āhus tvām ṛiṣhayaḥ sarve devarṣhir nāradas tathā
asito devalo vyāsaḥ svayaṁ chaiva bravīṣhi me

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Arjuna said: “You are ‘Parambrahman,’ ‘Param dham,’ ‘Param pavitra’; (for this reason) sages such as ‘Bhrigu’ etc., the divine sage ‘Narada,’ ‘Asit,’ ‘Deval’ and ‘Vyasa’ – all of them speak of You as ‘Shashvata,’ ‘Divya,’ ‘Purush,’ ‘Adideva,’ ‘Aja,’ and ‘Vibhu.’ You ‘Svayam’ are also telling me this.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
(In seven slokas – [10:]12 to [10:]18 – Arjuna, upon praising the Lord in hymn, is asking about knowing His Glorious Manifestations fully.) The knowledge that takes one to the shores beyond – that is what is known as “param.” “BrahmavidyApnoti param” – meaning: the one who is a knower of Brahman – that being comes to this “param” and comes to realize what kind of state this is. “Brahman” is the Limitless Great. This is also [being called] a “state.” It is being called a “state” only because if it is not called a “state,” it is not easy to explain all of these things nor is it easy to understand this matter. The knowledge that takes one to the shores beyond, the abiding place for that knowledge is called “Param Dham” [the Supreme Abode] – meaning: the state of enjoying the Bliss of Brahman. “Pavitram” [Pure] – a state devoid of toxicity. “Paramam” is the state of abidance after the life span of Brahmaa [creator aspect] is finished (when vibration ends). This is also a state. “Purusham” – the One Who is laying still in the abode of Maya – that is the One Who is “Purush.” “Shashvatam” [Immaculate] = One Who is never destroyed. “Divyam” [Divine] – means the space-like Form of the Self. Just as you cannot hold on to space, similarly your “You-state” cannot be held. That is why You are “Divyam.”
 
“Adideva” – the place from which the first beginning happens – that is “adi.” The beginning of this creation is from You. Thus, You are “Adideva” [God of Origin].
 
“Aja” means the One Who is never born. That is also that “You.” “Vibhu” means One Who is ever-unbound and ever-present in everything and everyone – meaning: the One Who is Omnipresent. That is also You.
 
All of these states are established in You. That is why You are “Bhavan” [the Universe] – meaning: that it is You Who actually are all of these states – I get to know this in that state, the state where every word is known with its cause, form and meaning. That is what is known as the state of “rishi” [sagaciousness]. “Ṛshayah sarve” [all seeing; seeing in all].
 
“Devarshi Narada” [divine sage Narada]: “Nara” means “Vishnu”; “da” means “daan” [giving]. The one who enables one to have Vishnu – that being is the one who is called “Narada” (see Chapter 10, sloka 26 [of the Gita]).
 
“Asit” – “a” = negation; “sit” = bound. One Who is not bound – it is He Who is called “Asit” – meaning: the state of being Free is the state of “Asit.”
 
“Deval” – “deva” = “devata” [divine being], and “lam” = the seed of the earth element. The state where the inner mind plays with the gods of the earthen-world – meaning: remains engrossed in the worship of form. It is that state that is called the state of “Deval.”
 
“Vyasa” – segmented knowledge – meaning: the one who, for the benefit of the world of living beings, divided the river of knowledge in the form of the Vedas (under the names: Sama, Rik, Yaju and Atharva), and for those with a lesser ability to grasp, created the Form-worship-oriented Puranas [spiritual mythologies], thereby making it possible to be on the path of Liberation – that is the one who is “Vyasa” ([it is] a state of being).
 
And “Svayam” [“I” as “I AM”]? That is the paravastha of Kriya! After being in this state, I come down, make the “I” into “you” and I understand these experiential states of Mine that I am experiencing. And again after coming down, I am coming to know that when My state of Rishi, state of Narada, state of Asit, state of Deval, state of Vyasa and state of Svayam happened – at that time, it seems that this knowledge: that the Upper “I” Myself Am “Parambrahman” [Supreme Absolute], “Param dham,” “Pavitra,” “Param Purush,” “Shashvata,” “Divya,” “Adideva,” “Aja” and “Vibhu” – this knowledge that I have seen, experienced and understood – it seems that it is “You” who is speaking about this [because of my having come down from Upper “I”].