### Prose 
 --- 
पश्यादित्यान्वसून् रुद्रानश्विनौ मरुतस्तथा |
बहून्यदृष्टपूर्वाणि पश्याश्चर्याणि भारत || 6||
paśhyādityān vasūn rudrān aśhvinau marutas tathā
bahūny adṛiṣhṭa-pūrvāṇi paśhyāśhcharyāṇi bhārata

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharat [Arjuna]! Behold the “Adityas,” “Vasus,” “Rudras,” the two “Ashvini kumars” and “Maruts.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
Behold! See the masses of Light filling the Sky like the effulgence of twelve suns together. There is no end to this Light, and at the same time the eyesight is not blinded. How incredible! And now look again and see within that very Light’s transformation – “Vasu” (see Chapter 10, sloka 23 [of the Gita]) – the individuated expression of a part of the Great Light. Rudran – (see Chapter 10, sloka 23 [of the Gita]) – the incomprehensible transmutation (destruction and transformation) – even looking at it with an unbroken focus, one cannot see the beginning and end of the transformation. Ashvinau – Now see again the Flowering Radiance of My Form[s]. One [Form] is blossoming and making another [Form] blossom. And another one blossoms and makes the blossoming blossom. See this/these heart-entrancing unbelievably beautiful Form/s. Marutah – Look again! All of those [expressions] break and there is the luminescent, shining, blazing ocean-waves – waves of Light! It is as if the forty-nine winds are blending together with the moon, sun and lightning and playing “holi” [festival of colors] in the Infinite Ocean’s Infinite Bosom. And how many more things there are that were previously unseen – those things that cannot be seen by anyone anywhere if they are in the nonsadhak [non-meditator] condition. See that as well! Oh, oh how wondrous! O Bharat [sadhak] – the sadhak whose consciousness is firmly established in the Light of Consciousness! Look, look! Look at all of these incredible happenings! 