### Prose 
 --- 
बीजं मां सर्वभूतानां विद्धि पार्थ सनातनम् |
बुद्धिर्बुद्धिमतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् || 10||
bījaṁ māṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ viddhi pārtha sanātanam
buddhir buddhimatām asmi tejas tejasvinām aham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Partha [Arjuna]! Know that I am the Universal Seed in all phenomena. I am the Intellect in the intellectual, and the Power in the powerful.

### Commentary 
 --- 
(10) The Divine “I-ness” is in the form of desire – from beginning-less time, in the form of the Seed-Cause, the Lord IS. Thus, He is the Universal Cause of all phenomena – meaning: the Lord of emergence. (11) That very “I” is also present as Intellect in the field of intellect in the upper part of the Ajna. Simply being a living being means there is intellect (meaning: which action to take, to not take – the power to determine that). That comes from that place. That is why He is the Intellect in the intellectual. (12) He is the Power in the powerful – the power by which unshakeable courage and faith comes about in the mind, the kind of enthusiasm and faith that is not shaken by anything whatsoever, by which things are accomplished right at the outset of the desire to do so – that is what is known as “teja” [force; power]. This “teja” is the Power of Brahman. Therefore it is Divine Power. It manifests in the Sahasrar. It is also called “Ojahshakti.” It is the result of supremely pure actions – or “satkarma.” That is why it does not come about for everyone. Those to whom it happens, they are the “tejasvi” [powerful]. When “tejasvis” are seen, people become captivated. The Consciousness-Power of the Lord, in the form of Power, is the foundation of the powerful. 