### Prose 
 --- 
अर्जुन उवाच |
ज्यायसी चेत्कर्मणस्ते मता बुद्धिर्जनार्दन |
तत्किं कर्मणि घोरे मां नियोजयसि केशव ||
arjuna uvācha
jyāyasī chet karmaṇas te matā buddhir janārdana
tat kiṁ karmaṇi ghore māṁ niyojayasi keśhava

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
[Arjuna said:] O Janardan, O Keshava [Sri Krishna]! If in Your perspective “buddhi” [knowledge or faculty of observing and ascertaining] is superior to “karma” [action], then why are you making me take part in such an intense act?

### Commentary 
 --- 
In order to remove the samsara-delusion from the disciple, in the previous Chapter [Chapter 2] Srigurudev [Sri Krishna], upon showing the primal eternal nature of the Self, revealed the sole way (teaching) of the path of sadhana - “uttishtha” [abiding above] – to cut the torrential bondage of the physical births and deaths. He showed that this path has two “kandas” [phases]: one is “karma” [action] and the other is “gyana” [knowledge/wisdom]. Moving prana from the Muladhar to the Agya, chakra by chakra, according to guru's instructions is indeed the “karmakanda” [phase of action]. And, keeping the attention fixed in Kutastha, taking the mind – together and complete with all of the vrittis [functionalities] of the senses – above the Agya, being established in the Sahasrar, doing “shravana-manana-nididhyasana” [hearing, contemplating, being absorbed] in stillness – meaning: hearing the Pranava Sound, doing contemplation (meditating with the inner vision) on the Light within the Sound, and making hearing, seeing etc. - all of the vrittis – into one melody [or: one tune] and becoming completely absorbed – all of this is the spiritual act of the “buddhi” [faculty of observing and ascertaining] – the “gyanakanda” [phase of knowledge/wisdom]. In this gyanakanda, there are two sections: the performance of the act using buddhi and the [yogic] state of being. These two sections are further divided into groups of twos. The first two divisions [of the first section – the part where the act takes place – in gyanakanda] are: “upasana” [worship; experiencing the glories]. This is a buddhi-oriented state (Chapter 2, sloka 50 [of the Gita]). And then there is the state where there is no knowledge of the hearer and the heard (Chapter 2, sloka 52). These are the two divisions [in the section of the buddhi-oriented act]. The second section - “gyana” [knowledge/wisdom]. In this, there is [first] a state attained through the practice of yoga (Chapter 2, sloka [unclear in print – possibly 53]), and [then] a realized state in yoga (Chapter 2, sloka 71). This section is divided into these two parts. It is at the end of this [progression of] karma-upasana-gyana that Brahman-Nirvana is attained after leaving the body [death] (Chapter 2, sloka 72). All of these are stages that belong to the path of sadhana; therefore they are related and connected to each other. However, when one particular stage is active – that very stage becomes the primary one over the other stages for that time. Thus, when there is karma [act], at that time action is primary. And then, upon passing through the stage of action, when the vritti [functionality] of certainty springs forth during the stage of buddhiyoga and “yoga” [connectedness] is attained, at that time karma [act] is “dureNa avaraṃ” [far away and unseen]. The sum of it is this - as the springing forth from buddhi happens because of the act, the act is the great thing [at that time]. And then again, because it is from buddhi or gyana that the “anamaya pada” (“Peace” or “establishment in Brahman”) is attained, buddhi is seen as “jyayasi” - even greater. After the all-knowing Srigurudev [Sri Krishna] says all of these things, the little-knowing disciple (sadhak) thinks: if buddhi is greater, then what is the need for the act? Right. It would be best to just sit silently with attention fixed in Kutastha and do “shravana-manana-nididhyasana” [hear-contemplate-be absorbed]. What is the need to make such an effort to move prana?! The sadhak did not understand that without the act, the springing forth from buddhi does not happen. And if the act is not there, then the functionality of buddhi also gradually diminishes, and one has to again become wrapped up in outer things. The sadhak concludes that the [yogic] act is just intense distress. Footnote - Just by being a sadhak, one is surely aware of the hardship of asana, pranayama etc. As well, the sadhak must also be aware of the intense bliss that comes forth at the paravastha of Kriya [post-Kriya poise], when one is focused on Kutastha and is absorbed, experiencing the divine things within. When one thinks about that [latter] state, it certainly does seem like the act is just intense distress. Footnote complete.It is for this reason that the sadhak is telling the World-Guru [Sri Krishna], “You are the One Who is “Janardana” (“jan” = emergence; “ardana” = destruction), the Lord of the destruction of past lives, and “Keshava” (“ka” = Creator; “isha” = Destroyer; “va” = Void), the “Kaivalya” (Only-ness) devoid of creation and destruction. Then why are You making me participate in such an intense (terrifying/terrible) act?”