### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासं सर्वेन्द्रियविवर्जितम् |
असक्तं सर्वभृच्चैव निर्गुणं गुणभोक्तृ च || 15||
sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktaṁ sarva-bhṛich chaiva nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛi cha

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
(That Brahman) pervades, and is present in, the functioning of all of the sense-organs, yet [at the same time] is free from all of the sense-organs (therefore, It is not acting as the functions of the senses), is without attachment to anything, and at the same time, It is the foundation of all. It is without the gunas such as sattva etc., yet It is the director of the gunas such as sattva etc. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
The senses reside indeed in the extremely small and boundary-enclosed body. But the operative Shakti [essential power] of the senses, and the essence of that Shakti – like the scent of the earth-element, the liquidity of the water-element, the sight of the fire-element, the touch of the air-element and the sound of the space-element – is all pervading and spread throughout all. In the state of the sadhak mentioned in the previous sloka, because of being in that expansive form, no sign remains of the boundary-enclosed senses and such. That is why It is free from all senses, yet taking the aspects of indriyas, such as gunas [essential qualities], Shakti, and the reflection of the essence, It remains as the foundation- and sustaining-cause of all, blended in with the expanse. In this state, there are no operations of any of the gunas (because this is a state beyond the gunas). That is why this is without contact/association to anything. But when the operation of gunas takes place somewhere, because it is happening within the expanse, according to the terminology of the world of beings [or: worlds/planes], It exists as the director of the gunas. 