### Prose 
 --- 
अपरे नियताहारा: प्राणान्प्राणेषु जुह्वति |
सर्वेऽप्येते यज्ञविदो यज्ञक्षपितकल्मषा: || 30||
apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpare
prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ
apare niyatāhārāḥ prāṇān prāṇeṣhu juhvati
sarve ’pyete yajña-vido yajña-kṣhapita-kalmaṣhāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
These ones who are knowledgeable in yagya – all become sinless in the performance of yagya, and at the end of yagya, imbibe Nectar and attain the Infinite Brahman-ness. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
All of the types of methods of yagya [yogic act] that have been stated [here] – all of them have one final destination. The differences in them [the yagya] are only about matters of attaining revelations or the attainment of powers. If yagya [yogic act] is performed according to injunctions, the impurities in the form of “kalmasha” [dirtiness] or restlessness in the chitta are all removed. The chitta becomes absolutely pure. The impressions of the worldly experience are never again imprinted on it. Later, after yagya is completed and finishes itself in samadhi, the Nectar that of Knowledge/Knowingness that comes forth – when the heart is completely filled with that, death never happens again. Because everything becomes filled with “I”, one attains the Infinite Brahman-ness. — Begin Footnote. — The Brahman-ness that sadhaks experience through the samadhi from constantly doing Kriyayoga – that is not “sanatan” (Eternal). That breaks. Gradually, by practicing this breakable-samadhi, one [eventually] becomes a “siddha” [perfected being]. And as one then attains the state of “jivanmukta” [Liberated while living in the body],“Sanatan Brahmatva” [Eternal Brahman-ness] is attained. Similarly, the kumbhak [breathless state] that comes about from doing chaturthik pranayam [pranayam with mantra] 20,736 times in one sitting – Sanatan Brahmatva is attained by that as well. And again, at the time of death, if one attains the “shuklAgati” [way of light] (devayana [divine path]), one also attains Sanatan Brahmatva. — End Footnote. —