### Prose 
 --- 
पवन: पवतामस्मि राम: शस्त्रभृतामहम् |
झषाणां मकरश्चास्मि स्रोतसामस्मि जाह्नवी || 31||
pavanaḥ pavatām asmi rāmaḥ śhastra-bhṛitām aham
jhaṣhāṇāṁ makaraśh chāsmi srotasām asmi jāhnavī

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Among the things that purify, I am “Pavan” [wind]. Among the wielders of “shastra[s]” [weapons], I am “Rama.” Among the “matsya[s]” [fishes], I am “Makara.” And among the currents, I am “Jaahnavi” [Ganges].

### Commentary 
 --- 
Pavanah pavatAmasmi – whatever kinds of purifying things there are – among them, I am the all purifying “vayu” [vital-air] (pranayam with the aim of the sadhaks’ enlightenment). “Pavan” [wind; air] – the sound “pav” means “to purify + “an” – a sound expressing the active principle – meaning: the one who purifies. The false is that which is impure (mutations). As the mutations of Maya come into Me and become purified, “I” am the all-purifying “Pavan.”
 
RAmah shastrabhṛtAmaham – “Rama” – the One [Supreme Self] Who romances the Atma [Self]. He is “shastrabhrit” [weapon-wielder]. “Shas” – to kill or to discipline. It is vayu [vital-air] that is the disciplinarian of the body, or the commander; thus, it is “shastra” [tool of discipline]. Joining the arrow of vayu to the bow of the spinal column, the One Who commands this and becomes victorious over all – that “Atma-Rama” [Rama-Self] is “I”. In the chariot of this body, the ten sense-organs are going in ten directions. The one who is controlling their movements – that is the one called “Dasharath” [symbolic name of Rama’s father in the Ramayana [an epic]]. From the state of “Dasharath,” the Romance of the Self and the Supreme Self arises. That is why that State of Romance is called “Daasharathi Rama.” During this state when the ten sense-organs are silent, vayu moves in the path of sushumna in the spinal column and thus the Romance in the form of Union of the Self and the Supreme Self takes place, and because of this Rama is known as “shastrabhriti” [weapon-wielder] and “Daasharathi” [the charioteer of the “ten”].
 
RAma – “rA” = cosmos + “ma” – the One Who is the Lord of the cosmos – He is called “Rama.” “Shastra” [a kind of weapon] is some thing with which one strikes, such as scimitar, axe etc. And “astra” [a kind of weapon] is some thing with which the striking is done by throwing, such as arrow, round projectile, bullets etc.6 And the one who uses these things with which one strikes – that person is called “shastrabhrit” [weapon-wielder]. — Begin Translator’s Note — The meanings of “shastra” and “astra” are also spoken of in reverse. “Shastra” can mean “missile,” and “astra” can mean “a weapon with which one strikes.” — End Translator’s Note —

Three avatars [divine incarnations] of Vishnu: “Parashurama,” “Daasharathi Rama” [usually known as “Rama”] and “Balarama” – because Daasharathi Rama was victorious over Parashurama, Daasharathi Rama gained primacy. And the highest form of the Divine-Life-Force of Krishna blossomed in Krishna, and not in Balarama [a being who was Krishna’s Divine Extension]. Among the Divine Glories, the Primary Glory is the “Only-ness.” Because this “Only-ness” remained ever-present in Daasharathi Rama, it is Daasharathi Rama that is said to be the Perfected Shastrabhrit. Now the thing is, whether you say “astra” or “shastra,” both of these are Prakritic [material]. Those whose source is Prakriti – they are Prakritic. “MayAdhyaksheNa prakṛtih sooyate sacharAcharam” [under My direction, Prakriti operates the moving and the non-moving]. The One Who is holding this Prakriti-weapon in the form of the cosmos, yet Whose “Only-ness” is not corrupted – the Rama Who is like this – that is the one who is “Shastrabhrit Rama.” That “Rama” is none other than “I”. (Dear sadhak! Observe that bit that is your “I”-State. If that is done, you will understand the meaning, along with realizing the Taraka-Brahman Rama State.)
 
ṚShANAṃ makarashchAmi – among fishes, I am “Makara.” “Rish” – the sound “ri” means “perspective”; the sound “sh” means “most great.” Among all of the greatnesses that preside within (such as: “so’ham/sohang” – That I am; “matsa” [I am That]; “so’ham brahmAsmi” – I am that Brahman; “aham brahmAsmi” – I am Brahman and all such recited sadhana-related words that there are – meaning: the words which, when sounded, make one Brahman-filled) – all of those are dressed with the highest of Glories. Among these, there is “Makara.”
 
“ma”     schAndre cha shive viShnau brahmaNi cha yame’pi cha viShe cha bandhane mantre samare’pi prakeertitah
 
“ka”     syad brahmaNi vishnau cha maheshvare sameeraNe
arkAgniyamadaksheShu pArtive cha patadriNi
kAme kAle mayoore cha kalevare’pi chAtmani
shabde deeptau dhane roge sukhasheerShajaleShu cha
 
“ra”     pAvake tathA teekhno bhoomau kAmAnale dhane
indriye dhanarodhe cha rAme’nile tathaiva cha
 
The One in Whom there exist: control, desire’s fire, the moon’s nourishment, Shiva’s settledness, Vishnu’s omnipresence, Brahmaa’s creativity, poison’s destructiveness, air’s life-force, bondage’s strictness, mantra’s fruit, time’s indivisibility, sun’s light and Daksha’s rulership [Daksha – a son of Brahmaa]; the One Who knows how to hold, and does not know how to let go – meaning: whoever or whatever it is that He holds, He does not let go of that (like the rays of the setting sun and the sun). He is the One called “Makara.” It is He who is the ride/vehicle of the purifying Ganges. The Great Shakti that delivers the fallen – She takes refuge in Me. That is why, among “rish” [fishes], “I” am “Makara.”
 
SrotasAmasmi jAhnavee – among the currents, or the “pravahinis” [flows], I am “Jaahnavi” (Ganges). If there is a beginning and an end [to a current], that is not “pravahini.” The current whose beginning and end cannot be found – that is “pravahini,” like the flow of Pure Awareness. There is no beginning or end to this current; thus, she is called “Ganga” [Ganges]. “Gacchateeiti ganga” [it goes; therefore it is called “ganga”]. The one whose unbroken motion is going on – she is the one who is called “Ganga” [Ganges]; she is “Jaahnavi.” Because [the sage] “Jahnu” drank up Ganga and ripped out the “jaanu” [knees] and threw them out, Ganga is called “Jaahnavi.” “Jaanu” means the junction point between the thigh and the leg, or knee – meaning: where motion begins. “Jahnu” – “jah” + “n” = in lordship; “haa” – means “to let go.” “Jahnu” is one who is a master renunciate. “Jahnu” is a “rajarshi” [royal sage]. The rishis [sages] that have rajoguna as the predominant guna – they are called “rajarshi[s].” This rajoguna is the playground of volition and non-volition. Therefore, in this field, the flow of pure knowledge is covered up. This is the “swallowing up of the Ganges” by Jahnu. Volition and non-volition are the play within, and of, the “manomaya kosha” [mental sheath]. Because speech and such do not come forth when one is in this state, people on the outside have called [a person in this state] “muni” [sage with a vow of silence]. And then again, when the state of “mauna” [not-speaking] comes to an end, and the sagacious words come forth (the current of teachings), that is when the cover of the covered-up current of knowledge comes apart and the current is seen. That is why there is the name “Jaahnavi” [of “Jahnu”]. That Immaculate Flow of Awareness is My Form. “Jnana pravAhA vimaleti ganga” [“ganga” is the pure flow of awareness]. That is why [“I” am] the Ganges – “Jaahnavi” – among the currents.