### Prose 
 --- 
प्राप्य पुण्यकृतां लोकानुषित्वा शाश्वती: समा: |
शुचीनां श्रीमतां गेहे योगभ्रष्टोऽभिजायते || 41||
prāpya puṇya-kṛitāṁ lokān uṣhitvā śhāśhvatīḥ samāḥ
śhuchīnāṁ śhrīmatāṁ gehe yoga-bhraṣhṭo ’bhijāyate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The person who is a fallen yogi lives for many years in the abode of those who have done good. Later, that being takes birth in the household of pure and beneficent people.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The falling-off from yoga is of two types: one – because of desires for the worldly experience arising in the mind, detachment becomes inconsistent and there is indiscipline. And another – when one dies due to the passage of time; when, although having intense detachment, because of accumulated karma, one helplessly falls to the magnetism of the worldly experience, and before going upwards during death, becomes mentally deluded. Those who fall from yoga due to desires of enjoyments – for them the destiny is according to this sloka. And those who fall from yoga even while being detached but because of psychic delusion – they attain the destiny according to the following sloka. The first type of person who has fallen from yoga: so that the fruits of the hereafter can be enjoyed, this being goes to the particular abodes of those who are good, according to one's particular karma, and resides in those places for some time and experiences unbroken happiness [for that time]. Later, after the enjoyments have finished their prescribed durations, that person leaves those places and enters the earthen-world, the land of karma – meaning: that person takes rebirth. Because this birth takes place in the household of blessed beings, the household of those blessed beings, for the sake of the spiritual ascension of the reborn yogi, is full of purity and high-natured behavior. The household that has the love for God as the highest ideal – that is the household that is pure.