### Prose 
 --- 
क्षेत्रज्ञं चापि मां विद्धि सर्वक्षेत्रेषु भारत |
क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोर्ज्ञानं यत्तज्ज्ञानं मतं मम || 3||
kṣhetra-jñaṁ chāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣhetreṣhu bhārata
kṣhetra-kṣhetrajñayor jñānaṁ yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharat [Arjuna]! Know that I am the Knower of all of the fields. The knowledge of the field and of the knower of the field – that is considered by Me to be [real] knowledge.

### Commentary 
 --- 
That field that was just spoken about – because all of that – from a fragment of ash to Maya itself – ends, the meaning of “nashvara” [rulership that ends] applies to these [manifestations] – meaning: all of these are “asat” [untrue]. And that [Eternal] Substance that has been spoken about – because That is the refuge of all of these finite things/beings, and because It is Itself “Sat” [True] and Unending, It is called their “Ishvara” [God/Lord] ([see] Chapter 18, sloka 61 [of the Bhagavad Gita]). That True Unending [One] is the thing that is to be known by the untrue and finite ones. And further, whatever is inside and outside these finite ones, the finite ones themselves know nothing at all about that. But that Supreme God is the Knower of each and every one of their atoms and particles. That is why He is “Kshetrajna” [Knower of the fields]. This world that is sitting in front [of you] – investigate and come to know these [things in this world] one by one. See which one of these is “you.” If you do this, you will see that not a single one of these is “you.” This is because everything that comes and goes is impermanent; all of that is “asat” [untrue]. That which is Permanent, “Sat” [True] – O Arjuna! That is that which is “You.” That is why I am saying that each body is itself this singular field. However, in the physical vision, they [the parts of the singular field] are seen as distinct and separate. But just as primal space is inside and outside every physical thing – similarly, the “I”, as the True and Pure Substance, is inside and outside all of the untrue and finite ones. It is because of that that all of the knowledge of all of those fields – meaning: all that is to be known [or: all that is knowable], “I know all of that.” That is why “I” am the Knower of the field[s]. This field that is finite and untrue, and this “I” that is the Supreme God, Unending and True – the Knowledge of these two – according to Me, this Knowledge is true knowledge.