### Prose 
 --- 
समोऽहं सर्वभूतेषु न मे द्वेष्योऽस्ति न प्रिय: |
ये भजन्ति तु मां भक्त्या मयि ते तेषु चाप्यहम् || 29||
samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣhu na me dveṣhyo ’sti na priyaḥ
ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā mayi te teṣhu chāpyaham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I am the same in all beings. There is none I hate, none I hold dear. But those who meditate upon Me with devotion – they reside in Me; I too reside in them.

### Commentary 
 --- 
That meditating upon “I” according to guru’s teachings and becoming “I” – in this “I” there is no feeling of duality or non-duality. This is because: the one who meditates upon “I” – that being becomes “I”. And “I-too” also is absorbed in meditation on “I” and becomes “I”. Therefore, “I” am waveless, devoid of “above” and “below.” There is no place for “dear” or “non-dear” in “I”. Everyone is the same. “Samo’ham” [all are same in Me]. “Aham” means “One.” When everything and everyone merges into this One, no above and below remain. When all phenomena/living beings merge with that “aham” – the greater and lesser, or bigger and smaller aspects of phenomena and living beings end and become the same. That is why there is no appearance of “dear” or “non-dear” in “I”. No matter who follows guru’s teachings with unwavering belief and devotion, and meditates – that very person falls into “I”, merges and becomes “I”. It is like being warmed from fire at the time of winter. One who stays close – his/her coldness is alleviated. One who stays far away – that person can see the fire but his/her coldness is not alleviated. But the fire is the same for both. Like “chaadan dori goda nori” [Bengali saying that is not properly translatable], however it is that one can take something, so it is for that person.