### Prose 
 --- 
पिताहमस्य जगतो माता धाता पितामह: |
वेद्यं पवित्रमोङ्कार ऋक्साम यजुरेव च || 17||
pitāham asya jagato mātā dhātā pitāmahaḥ
vedyaṁ pavitram oṁkāra ṛik sāma yajur eva cha

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I am verily this “jagat’s” [creation’s] “pita” [father], “mata” [mother] and “pitamahah” [grandfather]. I am “vedya” [object of knowledge], “pavitra” [purity], “ongkar” [omkar; OM], Rik [Veda], Sama [Veda] and Yajuh [Veda].

### Commentary 
 --- 
The meaning of “jagat” [creation] is “that which goes by.” That which goes by – I am the Cause of its emergence. This is how: reflecting in the chitta [personal consciousness], I say “I” in the form of “ahamkar” [I-sense; ego]. Creation happens from that ahamkar itself. That is why “I” am the creation’s father, or the progenitor.

 

And “mata” [mother]? The one in whose womb someone stays, the one with the womb is the mother of that someone. I am Infinite. This limited creation is verily in My Womb. That is why “I” am “mata” [mother]. Dear sadhak! Compare this to your long rest and your short rest. This one is a little less; that one is a little more. That is the difference.

 

DhAtA [the holder]. The One Who does “dharana” [holds]. Look! “I” am that too. This is because I am sitting with the all in My Womb.

 

PitAmaha [grandfather]. Before creation, when Maya has not yet become separate from Me, when, like salt in salty water, Maya was blended into Me. That “I” is one “I”. Then after that, the reflected reflection in the chitta is another “I”. Then after that, the garland of dramas in the creation is another “I”. Thus; [we have] three “I”s. The first “I” am the grandfather of this last “I”.

 

Vedyam [the object of knowledge]. The thing that is to be known that is known by the knower through knowledge – that is called “jneya” [the known]. Now, dear sadhak! Understand and see that this object to be known is that “salt-water ‘I’” [see above paragraph] and nothing else. Thus, “I” am “vedya” – meaning: the object of knowledge.

 

Pavitram [purity]. Free of corruption – meaning: that place where the mutating Maya cannot take Her mutations and play any of Her games of name and form. “I” am such.

 

OngkArah [Omkar; OM]. This means: that which, in order to pronounce/utter it, one has to draw from the extremely subtle and pull it to the extremely material, and show it, and then again throw it into the extremely subtle, and, upon making sure that the flow continues, one has to observe. “I” am that Pranava [OM]. (The sadhak should contemplate upon this deeply and understand it.)

 

Ṛk, sAma, saju, eva cha [[I am] Rik, Sama and Yajur Vedas as well]. (1) Rik – the East “I”; (2) Sama – the West “I”; and (3) Yajuh – the South/Right-side “I”.

 

Ṛk: “Ṛ” means “paavan” [purity]; “ka” means the creator aspect Brahmaa. The One Who makes Brahmaa “pavan” (pure) – He is “rik” – meaning: Veda. “Veda” = “vid” + “gh-jna.” The root “vid” means “jnana” [knowledge] – those among the humans with physical bodies who attain Emancipation through knowledge. Jnana [wisdom] comes forth from enquiry. Looking for the meaning in acts is called “vichara” [enquiry; analysis]. Thus is the Rik Veda – with its emphasis on rites/acts, being worship-filled, being the first movement, representing the beginning of creation. Its seed is “ahamkar” [I-sense, ego] – thus, it is “I”.

 

SAma: “S” + “aa” + “ma.” “S” = “sukshma shvaas” [the subtle breath]; “aa” = “aasakti” [attached-ness/connectedness]; “ma” = “mani” [jewel]. Upon connecting to the subtle breath (the Kriya is known through guru’s teachings), when the breath becomes still, a fluid light comes forth from within the clear covering. The difference between the two – “I” and “mine” – are known in this light. This is that which is called the “light of knowledge” by sadhaks – the light whose rays are seen always to be facing the West. This can be seen. That is “Sama.”

 

“’HiraNmayena kosheNa satyasyApihitaṃ mukhaṃ. TacchubhrajyotiShAṃ jyotih yadyadAtmavido viduh.’ – iti shrutih.” [The face of Truth is covered by the golden sheath. That is the light of all lights; it is he that the knowers of the self realize. So say the scriptures.] That light itself is “I”. Therefore, “I” am “Sama.”

 

Yajuh: “Y” + “j” + “u.” “Yaṃ” = in something’s own form; “jaṃ” = in the place of emergence; “u” = the place of abidance. The Effulgent Form of the Self that is seen in the middle of the [inner spiritual] yoni at a particular time during sadhana – that [experience/revelation] that is called “Atma-darshan” [seeing the Self] – that, by which, the following is clearly known: I am not the body; I do not even have a body; I am completely different/separate from these two, yet I am holding on the body even without touching it. That Form of the Self is verily “Yaju.” This can be seen on the “dakshina” side [right side; south side]. That is why sadhaks call this the “dakshina ‘I’.”