### Prose 
 --- 
बुद्धेर्भेदं धृतेश्चैव गुणतस्त्रिविधं शृणु |
प्रोच्यमानमशेषेण पृथक्त्वेन धनञ्जय || 29||
buddher bhedaṁ dhṛiteśh chaiva guṇatas tri-vidhaṁ śhṛiṇu
prochyamānam aśheṣheṇa pṛithaktvena dhanañjaya

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Dhananjaya [Arjuna!] The three types of intellect and steadfastness according to the gunas are now being stated. Listen. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
The sadhak [practitioner] has now reached the final stage of the “jnana-kanda” [phase of knowledge]. Now, being without karma [actions and their fruits], sitting in the state of non-doing, and abiding in the Self, the sadhak is seeing that everything in the world is according to the three types of gunas such as sattva etc. Among them the sattva guna is the one that is appropriate for taking up if betterment is desired. This is because “urdhaṃ gacchhanti sattvasthAh; madhye tiShThanti rAjasAh; adhogacchhanti tAmasAh” [upward goes the sattvic state; rajas remains in the middle; downward goes tamas]. In order to pick out only the sattvic condition from [the threefold conditions in] all of the things in the world, the sadhak, abiding in the Self and having the leisure to know, is observing the three types of conditions of everything. He/she sees the three types of states according to the three gunas in regards to knowledge, action and the doer. Now he is seeing the threefold conditions of intellect and steadfastness. If intellect and steadfastness are mastered, then the matters of attainments or the matters to know – nothing at all of those remain. When there is the enjoinment with pure intellect, the worldly experience, as well as likes and dislikes are abandoned, and the state of peacefulness comes about. Devotion to the Supreme dawns, and by that itself one gets to enter into the “I” Itself. Liberation happens. That the sadhak Arjuna is able to have victory in pure intellect – that is revealed by [his being addressed with] the name “Dhananjaya” (see commentary to Chapter 10, sloka 37 [of the Pranab Gita]). That is why he is being addressed as Dhananjaya and being told: “O Dhananjaya [Arjuna; the sadhak] – how the distinctions of intellect and steadfastness are according to sattva, rajas and tamas gunas – I am now telling you about that, separately and specifically. Listen.”