### Prose 
 --- 
न कर्मणामनारम्भान्नैष्कर्म्यं पुरुषोऽश्नुते |
न च संन्यसनादेव सिद्धिं समधिगच्छति || 4||
na karmaṇām anārambhān naiṣhkarmyaṁ puruṣho ’śhnute
na cha sannyasanād eva siddhiṁ samadhigachchhati

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
A person will not attain non-doingness without having acted. Just by taking sannyas [becoming a renunciate monk] one does not attain Realization. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
In gyana-nishtha [abidance through awareness], which is the realization of non-doingness or establishment in Brahman, there is the absence of action. Thus there is no disturbance/restlessness. There is the Onlyness, waveless Wholeness. And in action there are the tremendous waves of struggle, where there is nothing but restlessness. If these two are placed next to each other, they do seem antagonistic to each other. But yogis say, “That is not so (they are not antagonistic to each other).” The primary recourse to attain establishment in Brahman is actually karma-yoga [practicing the yogic act], which, if not performed, all of the vrittis [active tendencies] of the antahkarana (which is where action begins) cannot be completely brought to an end – meaning: the state where there is no memory of the vrittis does not come about. If one is not able to bring those [vrittis] to an end – that resting in the realization of non-doingness – the consciousness cannot apprehend that. This is because: the establishment in Brahman, or the realization of non-doing-ness comes about through the previous “doing” of that karma [yogic act]. The end of this act is the attainment of non-doingness, and the union at the end of the act is verily “karma-yoga” [union through the act]. Dear sadhak! See for yourself: when you went on to do the purification of the elements in the brahmanadi in the Muladhar, at that time, because of the colliding dissolutions taking place (the technique is known through the teachings of guru) – how much disturbance/restlessness you had to go through! When you pierced the Agya-chakra and put your attention on the non-doing Guru-ness – it is then that your non-doingness began. Gradually, the more you entered the Guru-ness, the more your restlessness in the Agya-chakra below went on to be farther and farther away. And your non-doingness continued to grow. When you merged with the Guru-ness, that prana-driving karma [duty] that you had, that which you had duly performed before – that completely left you. You got that realization of non-doingness. If you had not done the practice of driving prana in the path of consciousness (in the Space of Brahman), then you would have had to become wrapped up in the five elements of the worldly experience and you would have been drowning and gasping. You would never have been able to enjoy this Still Peace-Happiness. And see even more: before learning about driving prana in the path of sushumna, the masses of latent desires of the outer experiences that are acquired through the natural process of inhalation and exhalation and are imprinted in the chitta [personal consciousness; heart] – if you try to renounce actions (appear as a renunciate monk) while those imprints (meaning: the previously acquired karmas) are still there, then you could not get that realization of the state of gyana-nishtha (the state of rest in Brahman). That is why the Divine Lord said, “If the person does not perform karma [yogic act], then that person does not attain the state of non-doingness. Or – that person cannot attain Perfection by abandoning karma and becoming a purposeless monk either.”