### Prose 
 --- 
तेषां ज्ञानी नित्ययुक्त एकभक्तिर्विशिष्यते |
प्रियो हि ज्ञानिनोऽत्यर्थमहं स च मम प्रिय: || 17||
teṣhāṁ jñānī nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir viśhiṣhyate
priyo hi jñānino ’tyartham ahaṁ sa cha mama priyaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Amongst them [the four types mentioned in sloka 7:16], the jnani, because that sadhak is always united [to the Self] and only devoted to the One alone, is the highest. I am extremely dear to the jnani. The jnani is also extremely dear to Me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The one in whose consciousness the knowledge of this type – “I am the 'I', the Self of all the selves of all phenomena” – has risen (with absolute certainty) – that one is “jnani.” In the eyes of the jnani, all is Brahman, truly. Thus, the jnani has no vanity of the body, nor is the jnani’s mind ever away from the Self. Therefore, the jnani is “nityayukta” - meaning: he/she is “yukta” [united] to the Thing that is “nitya” [Eternal]. And the jnani's devotion (or where the mind remains) is only on the One and not on anything else. This is because the One Self is the jnani's only recourse. No other separate thing besides the Self is seen by the jnani. That is why the jnani is “ekbhakti” [devoted to the One and only to the One]. The other doers of good [see sloka 7:16] are not “ekbhakti.” This is because their devotion is distant [not immersed]; one devotion is on the goal – meaning: on the desired thing or intended state – and the other devotion is on the fulfillment of the goal, or the fulfillment provided by God. For the jnani, God is completely all. The jnani has no goal or intention. This is the reason why it has been said that the “I” — Begin Footnote. — The sum of it is this: the “I” or the Self is the dearest to everyone. Everyone is mad to make oneself happy, saying, “me, me, mine, mine.” The ordinary people, not being able to understand the True Form of one's own “I” due to the darkness of ignorance, become entangled in pleasure. But the jnani, because he/she has seen the True Form of “I” in the Light of Awareness, does not leave the happiness of the Bliss of the Self and does not descend to the pleasure of worldly joys. By partaking in the pleasures of the worldly experience, the heart becomes devoid of energy. In the happiness of the Self, the heart remains full of consciousness-power. That is why the jnani has extreme love for the Self. — End Footnote. — (meaning: the Indestructible Brahman) is extremely dear to the jnani. Furthermore, the jnani's heart is always pure; not even a hint of the dirt of desire is there. Therefore, the Self is Ever-Revealed and Present in the heart of the jnani. God never leaves that place, not even for the blink of an eye. The heart of the jnani is truly the Temple of God. That is why it has been said, “The jnani is dear to Me as well [just as I am dear to the jnani].”