### Prose 
 --- 
अर्जुन उवाच |
किं तद्ब्रह्म किमध्यात्मं किं कर्म पुरुषोत्तम |
अधिभूतं च किं प्रोक्तमधिदैवं किमुच्यते || 1||
arjuna uvācha
kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ kiṁ karma puruṣhottama
adhibhūtaṁ cha kiṁ proktam adhidaivaṁ kim uchyate

अधियज्ञ: कथं कोऽत्र देहेऽस्मिन्मधुसूदन |
प्रयाणकाले च कथं ज्ञेयोऽसि नियतात्मभि: || 2||
adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ’tra dehe ’smin madhusūdana
prayāṇa-kāle cha kathaṁ jñeyo ’si niyatātmabhiḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
“O Purushottama [Sri Krishna; the Lord]! What is ‘Tadbrahman’? What is ‘Adhyatma’? As well, what is ‘Karma’? What is that which is called ‘Adhibhuta’? And what exactly is that which is called ‘Adhidaiva’? Who is ‘Adhiyajna’ in this body? And how is it that that being resides here? And, O Madhusudan [Sri Krishna]! How can the yogis with controlled minds/hearts know You at the time of death?”

### Commentary 
 --- 
The seven things that the Lord mentioned in the last sloka of the previous chapter [Chapter 7] – the spiritually enquiring sadhak [practitioner] (Arjuna), in order to understand those matters by himself, is asking seven questions. (1) Gurudeva [Sri Krishna; the Lord]! This Brahman that You have just spoken about – what is that Brahman? (2) What is Adhyatma? (3) What is Karma? (4) What is that which is called Adhibhuta? (5) And what exactly is Adhidaiva? (6) Who is Adhiyajna in this body? And how is it that that being resides in this body? And (7) how can one know You at “prayankal” [see last line of sloka 8:2 above] (the time of leaving the body at the time of death)?1 At the time of asking all of these questions, the sadhak is addressing the Lord as “Purushottama” [the Highest Being] and “Madhusudan” [the destroyer of Madhu [mythological demon]; spiritual definition follows] – meaning: the sadhak, now free of the connection to Kshara-brahman [the perishable aspect of Reality] (the five elements), and, now being near Kutastha Aksharabrahman [see 7:29] in proximity, is seeing that the Lord Kutastha Chaitanya is Himself the One Who is beyond destruction, the “Niranjan Purush”[Immaculate Being] –  “Purushottama” [the Highest Being]. And as well, He is the destroyer of the “madhu” [honey], relating to the hankering for the enjoyments of the worldly experiences of the five elements – “Madhusudan” [destroyer of the “honey” of the worldly experience]. That is why he [Arjuna; the sadhak] is addressing the Lord as “Purushottama” and “Madhusudan” in this sloka. And more: at the time of danger, the Lord becomes the refuge [for the devotee] in the Form of Madhusudan. There is no danger for the jiva [individual soul] other than “prayankal” (the time of death). That is why Arjuna used the name “Madhusudan” when he brought up the subject of the time of death. [See Chapter 15, sloka 18 for commentary on “Purushottama,” and see Chapter 1, sloka 34 for commentary on “Madhusudan.”]