### Prose 
 --- 
वेदाहं समतीतानि वर्तमानानि चार्जुन |
भविष्याणि च भूतानि मां तु वेद न कश्चन || 26||
vedāhaṁ samatītāni vartamānāni chārjuna
bhaviṣhyāṇi cha bhūtāni māṁ tu veda na kaśhchana

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Arjuna! I know all that is in the past, future, present – the three phases of time. But no one (no one of them) knows me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“I” – meaning: the Supreme Self or the Supreme Lord’s nature is Eternal, Immaculate, Aware and Free. Although through His Expression it seems that there is the enjoyment of Maya, but in actuality, He is always beyond Maya. Thus, there is no ignorance for Him, because He is never covered by Maya’s covering. He is beyond limitations, and is without ego. The explanation of this is this: although there are the divisions of time within creation – such as past, future and present – for Him all is the Present. He is All-Knowing. Because jivas [individual souls] are enjoined to ego, they are little-knowing. That is why none of them are able to know Him. Just as – when clouds have gathered in the sky and the sun is covered, and the eyes of people cannot pierce through those clouds and have the sun be revealed – meaning: cannot see the sun – but [at the same time,] no matter how dense the clouds are, the light of the sun goes through them and its rays still light the world – the difference between the little-knowing jivas and the All-Powerful Lord is just like that. The one who, by “jnana-bhakti” [awareness-devotion], which is the treasure of sadhana [spiritual practice], destroys the ego – the light from that sadhak’s eyes destroys the veiling-power [of Maya] or makes it very weak. That is why the Supreme Lord is revealed to that sadhak.