### Prose 
 --- 
ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशां शूद्राणां च परन्तप |
कर्माणि प्रविभक्तानि स्वभावप्रभवैर्गुणै: || 41||
brāhmaṇa-kṣhatriya-viśhāṁ śhūdrāṇāṁ cha parantapa
karmāṇi pravibhaktāni svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Parantapa [Arjuna]! The duties of brahmins, kshatriyas and vaishyas along with the shudras [the four castes] are distributed according to the gunas [qualities] which arise from their own natures.

### Commentary 
 --- 
If action, doer, results etc, as well as all of the living beings are all endowed with the three gunas [primal qualities], then where is Liberation for the jiva [soul]? Knowing that Arjuna can ask a question like this, the Lord is heading this off as well. The Lord is saying that if one worships the Supreme Lord while carrying out the actions that are ordained to one according to one’s rightfulness, Liberation comes via the blessed gift of Knowledge that comes from doing that. This is really the essence of the entire meaning of the [Bhagavad] Gita. This essence in a collective form is shown from this sloka “brAhmaNakshatriyavisham” [brahmins, kshatriyas, vaishyas] until the end of the chapter [18].
 
The work of brahmins, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras [the four castes] are all divided in specifically separate forms. These delegations have been made according to the qualities arising from natures and behaviors. A little bit has to be understood about divisions being made according to qualities arising from natures and behaviors. One’s nature is God’s Prakriti or the tri-guna-endowed Maya. This Prakriti manifests three types of operative powers. One is called sattva, one is called rajas, and another is called tamas. These three are called “guna[s]” [qualities]. Thus, “the qualities from natures and behaviors” means sattva, rajas, tamas – these three gunas. Whatever happens in the world – it is completed via these three gunas. If these gunas are separate from each other, no activity is able to take place. Not even “being able” – the gunas do not separate in the first place. From the many combinations of their union and mixing, the many different activities happen. If in that union and mixing all three gunas are of the same proportion, then a state of equilibrium happens; no activity can take place. All of the activities of the world take place from their mixing in unequal proportions. It is from the beginning of creation that the four types of “varna[s]” [castes] or classes have been created due to the variations of the mixing of the three gunas. In the first class, sattva [guna] is predominant; the other two gunas are subservient and succumb to sattva. In the second class, sattva mixed with rajas is predominant; tamas succumbs. In the third class, rajas mixed with tamas is predominant; sattva succumbs. And in the fourth class tamas mixed with rajas is predominant; sattva succumbs. The whole of the jivas [persons] are divided in these four classes. The jiva of the first class is brahmin; the jiva of the second class is kshatriya; the jiva of the third class is vaishya, and the jiva of the fourth class is shudra. Each of the three gunas has its own power of operation. But they mix. And according to the proportions of different mixes, there is the permutation into the four classes. Thus, the work of the brahmin class is of one type; the work of the kshatriya class is of one type; the work of the vaishya class is of one type; the work of the shudra class is of one type. That is why it is being said that all of the duties of the brahmins, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras have been ordained according to the gunas/qualities arising from their natures and behaviors.
 
There is a somewhat more particular meaning to the term “natures and behaviors.” According to each one’s fruits of [previous] actions, jivas [souls] take good and bad births. When the jiva leaves one body [dies physically] and is in the post-body state, it carries over the previously created mental and sensory state/s; thus, the samskaras [impressions in consciousness] from the previous birth remain. Being under the power of these samskaras, the jiva returns, and there the operative qualities converge – meaning: [the jiva] gets the qualities of one of the classes among the four classes. The previously carried over samskaras make up that which is called “nature” [of a particular person]. The qualities of a particular class that [the jiva] gets because of being under the power of that “nature” – that is “qualities arising from natures and behaviors.” So it can be said that no matter the class in which the jiva is partaking – such as brahmin etc., his/her work is ordained according to the qualities that have come forth from the samskaras created in the previous life/lives.
 
In the original sloka [18:41 of the Bhagavad Gita], brahmin, kshatriya and vaishya are grouped together in one compound word-segment, and shudra is in a separate segment. By this, the [idea that] the [first] three castes are “dvija” [can be twice-born; can be initiated] and that they have the right to the Vedas – that is what is hinted. And because shudras are excluded from the right to the Vedas, the [word “shudra”] is not included in the first compound word-segment [in the sloka].
