### Prose 
 --- 
नाहं प्रकाश: सर्वस्य योगमायासमावृत: |
मूढोऽयं नाभिजानाति लोको मामजमव्ययम् || 25||
nāhaṁ prakāśhaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛitaḥ
mūḍho ’yaṁ nābhijānāti loko mām ajam avyayam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I am not revealed to everyone. That is because this creation is completely covered by Yoga-Maya [see commentary below] and is ignorant; thus, they cannot know Me, the Primal and Inexhaustible One.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Because of the covering of Yoga-Maya being there, those without buddhi [see commentary to sloka 7:24] are not able to know the Supreme Reality of “I”. “Yoga-Maya” means desires. The unthought of occurrences that occur through the unimaginable play of Consciousness of the Lord – that is called “Yoga-Maya.” This is the Desireless Desire or Wishfulness of the Divine Goddess or the Great Shakti, — Begin Footnote. — * yA sA mAheshvareeshaktirjnAna roopAtilAlasA vyomasaṃjnAparAkAShThA seyaṃ haimavati matA [the one known as Haimavati [Goddess Parvati] is the Supreme Power, Knowledge Itself, expressing Herself as Wishfulness/Desire; She is with Lord Shiva and is the Highest Goal] — End Footnote. — which cannot be comprehended within the jiva-experience. This Shakti rises forth already endowed with the three gunas [primal qualities]. That is why She is called “Yoga”-”Maya” [manifestation enjoined with qualities]. It is this Desire that permeates the entire creation. It is like the covering of clouds between the Sun and the Earth. Being present between the Supreme Self and the jiva, it [Yoga-Maya] keeps the Supreme Self hidden from the eyes of the jiva (covered). It is due to the Power of this Desire that people are captivated by the wished-for pleasures as well as by the ideas “I will do this, I will do that, this is mine, that is mine” etc. – and thus they are devoid of any knowledge. That is why they cannot pierce the covering and are not able to know the Reality of the Primal and Inexhaustible Supreme Self. But the one who is, through the power of devotion, able to pierce the covering of Yoga-Maya – meaning: the one who can cast off the samsaric desires – that person no longer has coverings over the eyes. That sadhak can see all. The Supreme Lord becomes revealed to that sadhak – meaning: the Lord is Ever-Revealed to the devotee and the jnani. He is only unrevealed to the non-devotee and the non-jnani.