### Prose 
 --- 
यं संन्यासमिति प्राहुर्योगं तं विद्धि पाण्डव |
न ह्यसंन्यस्तसङ्कल्पो योगी भवति कश्चन || 2||
yaṁ sannyāsam iti prāhur yogaṁ taṁ viddhi pāṇḍava
na hyasannyasta-saṅkalpo yogī bhavati kaśhchana

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Pandava [Arjuna]! Know that that which is called “sannyas” [renunciation] in the scriptures is that which is called “yoga” [spiritual union] as well. This is because without completely letting go of volition, no one can ever become a yogi.

### Commentary 
 --- 
What is that which is called “yoga”? This: “yogashchittavrittinirodha” [yoga is the ending of the vrittis [automatic activities]] in the chitta [one's consciousness] or “yogshchittasamAdhAnam” [yoga is the equipoise of consciousness] – meaning: the ending of the vrittis in consciousness or the state of the equipoise of consciousness is called “yoga.” All of the active conditions that arise due to mind connecting to the worldly experience and the senses – each of those are particular vrittis. All of those are the states of being thrown-off, deluded etc., or the states of disturbance. When the connection to the worldly experience and the senses are torn away, no more vrittis arise in the chitta; equipoise comes. That state is that which is called “the stopping of the vrittis in the chitta” or “the equipoise of the chitta.” In order to attain the equipoise of the chitta, one has to first get rid of volition through the “abhyasayoga” [the yoga of practice]. It is only after the [proactive] volition is abandoned that the reactive mentations go away automatically. Otherwise it does not happen. Thus, if “sannyas” - meaning: the end of everything or the casting-off [of everything] – does not happen, yoga also does not happen. At the same time, in the fifth chapter [of the Gita] it has been said that sannyas does not happen without yoga. Therefore, yoga and sannyas are interdependent. One does not happen without the other. And as well, according to the scriptures, the casting off of all karma and the fruits of karma is called “sannyas.” Thus the Supreme Goal of both yoga and sannyas are the very same thing. 