### Prose 
 --- 
सञ्जय उवाच |
एतच्छ्रुत्वा वचनं केशवस्य
कृताञ्जलिर्वेपमान: किरीटी |
नमस्कृत्वा भूय एवाह कृष्णं
सगद्गदं भीतभीत: प्रणम्य || 35||
sañjaya uvācha
etach chhrutvā vachanaṁ keśhavasya
kṛitāñjalir vepamānaḥ kirīṭī
namaskṛitvā bhūya evāha kṛiṣhṇaṁ
sa-gadgadaṁ bhīta-bhītaḥ praṇamya

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Sanjaya said: “Hearing these words from Keshava [Sri Krishna], Arjuna, trembling, bowed to Krishna with joined palms, and, with great fear, prostrated to Him and spoke in a faltering voice.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
The unperfected sadhak cannot remain in the Settledness in Brahman for very long, nor can he/she move to a higher place with the current of the upward progression for long, if the experiential analysis remains. Therefore, one has to come down. The experience that is realized after coming down – that actually happens from the Ajna-chakra. The five elements such as earth etc. are in the five chakras such as Muladhar etc. Those five elements are, verily, “sarva” [“all”]! The Ajna-chakra is above those five. If the lower five are not conquered, then one cannot have the right to abide at the Ajna-chakra. The sadhak who abides at the Ajna-chakra – that is the one who is “panchajayi” [five-conquering]. That one can be said to be “sanjaya” (“saṃ” [with] + “jaya” [victory]). (See Chapter 1, slokas 1 and 21.) “Keshava” – “ke” = in water; and “shava” = dead body [corpse] – meaning: after dissolution, the One Who remains in repose in the water of dissolution, like a limitless corpse, as salt in salty water – the state in which the joy of creation – meaning: “arising-ness” – and the despondency of destruction – meaning: dissolution (the departure) are not there – the One Who is in this state – that is the One Who is called “Keshava” (see Chapter 10, sloka 14). When the sadhak comes down [from above] after having experienced the State of Keshava – the resulting intoxication from the mixing together of the memory of that previously experienced State of Keshava, the feelings of Keshava, as well as the consciousness of the current state – just that much is the experience of “hearing Keshava’s words.” “Kritanjali” [reverence with joined palms]: at this time, even if the attention is upward, there is no power to ascend. However, because the attention is upward, the downward movement is blocked as well. This conjunction of the two directions bringing about a stupefied state – this is that which is called “kritanjali.” “Vepaman” [trembling] – [the explanation follows]. The substances to be experienced are now present. At a time like this, before contact [with the substances], the inner trembling that comes about due to a weakness born of intense attachment – that is called the state of “vepaman.” “Kiriti” means dressing up the head. The consciousness of the sadhak who is still unperfected yet is full of tremendous enthusiasm in every way is “kiriti” – meaning: the sadhak who is at the head of every sadhak in deed and qualities – among the sadhaks, he/she is the one who is called “kiriti.” The mixing together of the vrittis [movements] of great joy, great sorrow, great fear, great astonishment, great affection, great enthusiasm and such – when they unite and try to come out from within – the choked speech that happens along with the eyes filling with tears – that is called “gadagada.” “Bheetabheetah pranamya” – when the above-mentioned states appear together in the heart – at that time, the sadhak becomes afraid again and again, fearing “oh I may lose everything I hold dear.” All of the bravado of one’s own ego disappears, and drooping down, one can no longer adhere to the [usual] force of vayu [vital-air] within. [At this time,] one draws and expels inhalations and exhalations that are beautiful, hindrance-free (easy) and long. The functionalities of the worldly experience completely end. And due to the presence of Divine Experiences, the movement of breath flows up and down exactly in the middle of the brahmanadi. That is called “pranam” [reverent bowing]. At this time, the love that spontaneously blossoms forth for the Bestower of Liberation – that is the bit that is hinted at as “speaking to Krishna.” In this state, no vritti [functionality] that is Mayic (reflected consciousness, samskaras [latent tendencies/impressions] born of previous karma [acts] and obligatory duties etc.) is able to come forth. Thus, Emancipation or Eternal Peace, born of the destruction of desires and the victory of sadhana, comes about inevitably. Because this firm knowing manifests, the statement “Sanjaya said” is made.