### Prose 
 --- 
किं पुनर्ब्राह्मणा: पुण्या भक्ता राजर्षयस्तथा |
अनित्यमसुखं लोकमिमं प्राप्य भजस्व माम् || 33||
kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā bhaktā rājarṣhayas tathā
anityam asukhaṁ lokam imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
That the pure brahmins and devoted ones who are the royal sages would [also] attain the Supreme Destination – does that even need to be discussed? Therefore, having already had this impermanent and unhappy world, now meditate upon Me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The one who knows Brahman [the Supreme] – meaning: the one for whom, due to experiencing the happiness from being in contact with the Bliss of Brahman, the “I-am-the-body” idea has been destroyed – that is the one who is “brahmin.” And the one who is partaking in the worldly-experience (well, it is true that people often have an outlook like insects of the worldly experience), yet that person is fully aware of every result from partaking in the worldly experience, the one who knows about that which is beyond the evident, the one who is not thrown off of the Knowledge of the Self by the partaking of the worldly experience – that person is “rajarshi” [royal sage]. These beings are all pure – meaning: they do not have self-awareness connected to the body of excrement and urine. And they are all devotees – meaning: by absolutely nothing are they shaken and lost. That these beings, even after having [everything desirable] in this impermanent and unhappy world, would be absorbed in meditation upon that Upper “I” – does that even need to be discussed? Dear sadhak! Now see. After having risen up to the Ajna-chakra – that you are seeing – with your downward vision – the impermanent and unhappy activities of the worldly experience, and that you are again – with upward vision –coming to know the Spiritual Truth of the Self, that all of this is being directly seen/experienced by you, and [in the upward vision] that nothing is known indirectly [or: from another source] – this is your state of being a “royal sage.” [Now,] let go of the downward vision and meditate only upon “I”.