### Prose 
 --- 
नास्ति बुद्धिरयुक्तस्य न चायुक्तस्य भावना |
न चाभावयत: शान्तिरशान्तस्य कुत: सुखम् || 66||
nāsti buddhir-ayuktasya na chāyuktasya bhāvanā
na chābhāvayataḥ śhāntir aśhāntasya kutaḥ sukham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
One who is “ayukta” [unconnected to the Self] has no intelligence and no “bhavana” [spiritual state of being; contemplation] either. Those who are without “bhavana” do not have peace. And where can there be happiness for those who are without peace?

### Commentary 
 --- 
The one who has serenity, self-control, forbearance, austerity, reverence, resolve etc. of the “sadhana chatushtaya” [see footnote in Chapter 1, sloka 2 of the Gita for full definition] is “yukta” [connected]. — Begin Footnote. — See Chapter 5, sloka 12 of the Gita. — End Footnote. — The one who is “ayukta” [unconnected] – meaning: one who does not have sadhana chatushtaya (see the footnote in Chapter 1, sloka 2). Because that person's intellect is not fixed [in the Self], that intellect cannot be said to be the intellect of the path of yoga. And that person does not have “bhavana” [spiritual state of being; contemplation] — Begin Footnote. — “Bhavana” [spiritual state of being; contemplation] = being in “abhava” [lack; or: no mood] brings about the longing for “bhava” [spiritual state; or: mood]. This is the vritti [active thing] happening at this time (known through sadhana). See Chapter 8, sloka 3 for “bhava.” — End Footnote. — either, because his/her heart remains enamored to the attractiveness of the worldly experience and that person cannot hold to [or: concentrate on] the sphere of Divine Light. Those who do not have “bhavana” do not have peace – meaning: there is no calmness in the heart, because the mind is constantly engaged in the world and cannot find time to rest. This type of non-peaceful person has no happiness – meaning: because the inner sky remains covered by the clouds of the worldly experiences, there is no revelation of the Luminous Sphere.