### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
कुतस्त्वा कश्मलमिदं विषमे समुपस्थितम् |
अनार्यजुष्टमस्वर्ग्यमकीर्तिकरमर्जुन || 2||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
kutastvā kaśhmalamidaṁ viṣhame samupasthitam
anārya-juṣhṭamaswargyam akīrti-karam arjuna

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The Lord said: “Arjuna! How did this “kashmal” [ordinary meaning: confusion, timidity; see commentary below for spiritual definitions] – which is “anAryasevita” [not of service to sages], “asvargya” [does not lead to heaven] and is “akeertikara” [disgraceful action; opposite of works of eminence] – come upon you at this time of danger?”

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Sama” means the state which is without up and down (without stirring), when – because of the “me and mine” idea not being present – not even a trace of desire remains. Yet, only a kind of “I am I” - difficult to explain – type of “awareness of being” feeling remains. After having attained realization of the “sadhana chatushtaya” [see commentary on sloka 2 of Chapter 1] and having experienced this [aforementioned] state, when one comes down and goes to destroy the seed of samsara, there is “visham” [danger; distress] – meaning: an extreme experience of a disharmonious state comes about. At that time, the awareness of “me,” “mine” and “others” [or: “others'”'] - these three – becomes very strong. From the intense power of a kshatriya [warrior] [being experienced by the sadhak] in Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra, the rajoguna springs forth. The force of saving “me” and destroying “others” becomes quickened, and the divine vision begins to operate. But if one falls into the mire of the treachery of Maya, one sees in the heart – meaning in the middle of the Kutastha-vision – some things like threads, sparks, wheels, zig-zags, twisting lines, colors of many kinds – all kinds of mixed up and convoluted lines, squiggly things wiggling and such. This is what is called “kashmal.” At that time, the intellect is under the power of Avidya and is in delusion, and one feels that the “other” is “my own.” This aberrant state of mind is also called “kashmal.” This “kashmal” is “anAryasevita” [not of service to sages], “asvargya” [does not lead to heaven] and “akeertikara” [disgraceful action; opposite of works of eminence].
 
“AnAryasevita” [not of service to sages]: The one whose mind has taken up the “subtle,” and thus finds Oneness/Equipoise in the world of Consciousness/Spirit – he/she is “arya” [sage]. And the one who loses oneness/equipoise by mixing into the mixture of the physicality in the physical world – it is he/she who is “anarya” [non-sage]. One becomes “anarya” by succumbing to the pull of Maya and falling in distress. Then, because of the inner vision being covered with “kashmal” [confusion], only “kashmal” [nonsensical visual stuff] goes on in the inner vision – meaning: one becomes a servant of “kashmal” [confusion; timidity]. This is why “kashmal” is not of service to sages.
 
“Asvargya” [does not lead to heaven]: “svarga” [heaven] = “sa” + “va” + “r” + “ga”; “sa” - the subtle breath; “va” - void; “r[a]” - power; “ga” - movement. The powerful movement that happens when the subtle breath becomes void is what is verily “svarga” - meaning: the attainment of the Light of the Self. Applying the “ya” (the “y” grammatical device) makes it “svargya” - meaning: that which causes the “attainment of the Light of the Self.” That which causes one to not be able to attain that “attainment of the Light of the Self” – that is what is called “asvargya” (“a”  = lack + “svargya” [attainability of heaven]. When one succumbs to the pull of Maya, the movement becomes “downwards-directed,” and right away, “kashmal” comes forth, and “svarga” (the Light of the Self) is no longer seen, and one becomes progressively covered up with the guna of tamas. That is why “kashmal” “does not lead to heaven.”
 
“Akeertikara”: The renowned identification that comes about from the accomplishment of a “karma” [endeavor] – that is what is known as “keerti” [accomplished act]. Such as: when one takes up samsara [the meaning here is: “life of a householder” or “worldly life”], one is a “samsari” [householder; one whose life is in the world]; when one gets wealth, one is “wealthy”; when one attains knowledge, one is a “scholar”; if one knows science, one is a “scientist”; if one is practiced at yoga, one is a “yogi”; when karmas are finished, one is a “sannyasi,” etc. The complete end of karma is Brahman-ness. But there are many different stages before the complete end [of karma]. Those various stages are individual places of accomplishment. The one who crosses over all of the stages and goes up to the absolute highest stage, that is the one who is “keertiman” [the highly accomplished one]; that is who is “jivanmukta” [Liberated while still living in the physical body]. The “videha-mukti” [Liberation after dropping the body] owned by [that person] is in his/her “hastamal-kavat” [in the person's hands] or under the power of his/her wish/whim. In no way does one who is “veera”[heroic/valiant] succumb to the power of Maya. Regardless of thousands of temptations/pulls [that sadhak] remains in the state of penetrating upwards. It is that sadhak that goes on to rise to the top of accomplishments, unhindered. If, because of the power of time, [that sadhak] has to leave the body before reaching the top, even then [that sadhak] is not stopped. The magnetic, drawing power that was gained by his/her sadhana then becomes extremely strong, and with the speed of lightning, in the blink of an eye, [that power] takes the sadhak across all stages and all the way to the top. That sadhak receives Eternal Life – meaning: attains permanent establishment in the “State of No Return.” That is why it is said in the proverbs: “keertiryasya sa jeevati” [one who is accomplished, lives]. But the one who loses his heroic/valiant nature and is not able to penetrate upwards and gets stuck – “kashmal” appears in front of that [sadhak], covering the sky of consciousness with fog, and it covers up the inner perception of consciousness. That sadhak, now having lost the way and having lost all direction, falls in the cycle of Maya and continuously goes around in circles. For that sadhak there is no more attainment of “keerti” [renowned accomplishment]; there is only “akeerti” [disgraceful lack of accomplishment]. This is because fruitless acts and acts of “asat” [non-spiritual; non-righteous] comprise that which is called “akeerti.” This type of unaccomplished sadhak does not “attain life,” or it happens much later. This is because: just as “keerti” [spiritual accomplishment] makes the jiva cross over all of the karmic boundaries – similarly, “akeerti” [lack of spiritual accomplishment] makes [the jiva] fall to very low stages, or keeps one pulled back and does not allow one to cross over the [karmic] boundaries. Thus, that sadhak has to succumb to the power of [the cycle of] life and death.
 
That is why the Lord is saying: “How did this kind of 'kashmal' come to you? You, the one who by the powers of the current of your Self conquered all – the Earth, the subtle world and such -   and traveled throughout heaven – meaning: moved about in the thousand petals of the Sahasrar [thousand petaled lotus], who received “pashupata” through the blessings of Mahadev [Lord Shiva] – meaning: by submerging yourself in the Brahman-bindu in the middle of the center of the flower of Sahasrar, you received the power of becoming established in Shiva-ness, which destroys all evil in the blink of an eye! Being this kind of a being, this delusional way you are now behaving does not become you.”