### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
मय्यासक्तमना: पार्थ योगं युञ्जन्मदाश्रय: |
असंशयं समग्रं मां यथा ज्ञास्यसि तच्छृणु || 1||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
mayyāsakta-manāḥ pārtha yogaṁ yuñjan mad-āśhrayaḥ
asanśhayaṁ samagraṁ māṁ yathā jñāsyasi tach chhṛiṇu

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The Lord said: “O Partha! With mind attached to Me, continuously practicing yoga and having me as the Recourse, listen now about how to know Me completely and without any doubt.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
Becoming “mayi Asaktamah” [making the mind attached to Me/the Self] (meaning: connecting the mind with the Atma-mantra to only the Self – the “That” - and practicing “yoga” (moving prana [in a specific way]) is indeed “karma” [spiritual action] – the first level of the path of sadhana. After speaking in previous chapters [of the Gita] about whatever is necessary to say regarding this “karma,” in the final sloka of the sixth chapter [of the Gita], the Lord has shown that only when such “karma” is done filled with devotion is the ultimate result of said “karma” - the State of being in Union – attained. This is because: it is only when yoga is practiced with mind attached to the Self that “madAshrayah” [recourse in Me/the Self] (oneself having recourse in Oneself) happens – meaning: the sadhak finds shelter in his/her lost treasure, the Supreme Self. The meaning of this is: before the coming about of tranquility in pranic activity, the Causality of all power – the Kutastha-Being – used to be seen at a distance; now, as pranic activity has become still, He is near. The consciousness-substance of the sadhak ends up being in Him without any hindrances. He becomes the only Shelter. This kind of nearness to the Lord is called “upasana” [ordinary meaning: worship; analysis of alternate meaning: being near – follows] (“upa” = near + “asana” = established-ness [being near]). Thus: “karma” [spiritual work] being finished at the end of the sixth chapter [of the Gita], now this “upasana” [being near to the Lord; worship] begins here at the seventh chapter [of the Gita]. Upasana is verily the second level of the path of sadhana. It is via this upasana that the Supreme Lord's Wonders, Power, Energy, Richness etc. - all of the Qualities of the Lord can be known – can be realized – like when fire and iron gradually merge together. How that is known – that is what the Lord is teaching in this chapter. That Arjuna (the sadhak) is now fit and worthy of hearing that teaching, and that he is capable of receiving such teaching – it is to make this be understood that the Lord is addressing him as “Partha” - meaning: the sadhak, through the Pulling Power of Divine Mother's Nature and Energy, is able to leave behind one state and take up another state – the Lord is hinting at this particular thing.