### Prose 
 --- 
बलं बलवतां चाहं कामरागविवर्जितम् |
धर्माविरुद्धो भूतेषु कामोऽस्मि भरतर्षभ || 11||
balaṁ balavatāṁ chāhaṁ kāma-rāga-vivarjitam
dharmāviruddho bhūteṣhu kāmo ’smi bharatarṣhabha

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharatarshabha [Arjuna]! The Strength that is present in the strong who are free of desires and passionate attachment – I am that [Strength]. And the Desire that is not in opposition to dharma – I am that [Desire] as well.

### Commentary 
 --- 
(13) “The 'I' as the Strength from being free of desire and passionate attachment.” The longing to get something of the worldly experience that has not yet been received is called “kama” [desire], and the attachment to something of the worldly experience that one has received is called “raga” [passionate attachment]. The strength of a human being that is devoid of “kama” and “raga” - meaning: that strength – when one has it – that enables a person to not be desirous of, or interested in, the enjoyments of the worldly experience even when one comes in contact with the enjoyments of the worldly experience, the strength that enables a person to remain still without feeling attachment, the strength that does not allow the rising of restlessness and anxiety in the body and mind – that strength is indeed the Strength of the Self or Divine. Thus, He is the Strength of the strong. Therefore, the Lord, in the form of Strength, is the foundation of the strong. (14) “I am the Desire that is not in opposition to dharma.” Volition, enquiry, intuition, contemplation – the fully functioning state in which these four vrittis [functionalities] of the antahkarana [personal consciousness] experience the Self-Being – that state is called “dharma.” The desire that is not in opposition to this “dharma” – meaning: the desire whose experience does not make one break from this “dharma,” – meaning: when one does not lose oneself in the kinds of hankering and pain that exists in the partaking of the worldly experience – that is the desire that is not opposed to dharma. That desire is Divine. Doing according to the slokas such as “yuktAhAravihArasya” [moderation in diet and relaxation] etc., having a sattvic diet, sattvic activity and sattvic relaxation, and following the injunctions of the stages of life such as brahmacharya [student celibate stage], grihasta [married householder], and being with the righteous spouse etc. are the carrying out of desires that are not opposed to dharma. The Lord's “I-ness” or Consciousness-Power is in the form of that Desire that supports dharma and is the foundation of the Cosmos.