### Prose 
 --- 
ये यथा मां प्रपद्यन्ते तांस्तथैव भजाम्यहम् |
मम वर्त्मानुवर्तन्ते मनुष्या: पार्थ सर्वश: || 11||
ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāns tathaiva bhajāmyaham
mama vartmānuvartante manuṣhyāḥ pārtha sarvaśhaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Partha [Arjuna]! In whichever way people contemplate Me, I bless them in exactly that way. Thus, all human beings going in all ways actually follow My path.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Yes, it is true that many have attained “My State,” but the foundation of it is belief/faith. The reason: “yAdṛshee bhAvanA yasya siddhirbhavati tAdṛshee” - meaning: as one's state is within, one's attainment will be according to that. In sadhana, the sadhak dresses him/herself up as “liberated,” “bound,” “wrapped up,” “freed,” “sakama [with desire],” “nishkama [without desire],” “one,” “many” etc. In whichever way one will see oneself, in the fruit of sadhana, the sadhak's Self will dress up the same way and receive the sadhak in the same way – meaning: the sadhak will attain that particular state. The reason for this is: human beings — Begin Footnote. — The fully endowed, “manovritti” [mind-vritti] oriented jiva is “manush” [human]. — End Footnote. — follow up on all matters according to the perception/belief in one's own self — Begin Footnote. —  As one perceives particular matters, one goes about according to those particular perceptions. One does not go about according to differing perceptions. Thus, in those particular matters, one's own perceptions make up the “vartma,” or path, of one's antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness]. — End Footnote. — – meaning: one finds the way according to one's own belief/faith. Just as when water is churned, there are a succession of waves, bubbles and foam, in the same way, God, through His Own Power of Will, has churned Himself and has dressed Himself up as this creation. Waves, bubbles and foam are nothing but water; the difference is only in name. This creation is also nothing but the Self. But the fact that a human being believes itself to be separate from the Self – delusion is the reason for that. That bit of delusion is that which is Maya. Thus, whatever the inner states of a human being – whether it is “sakama” [with desire], whether it is “nishkama” [without desire], whether it is good – however it may be – all are actually the states of the One Self. Just as one light is seen in different forms [colors] such as red, blue, white, green etc. because of going through glass [of different colors] – in the same way, the One Self, through variations of Its Own Power of Will or Maya-Shakti, through Itself becoming the twenty-four types of substances, manifests Itself in many ways. These twenty-four substances are verily the “vartma” or path of the Self – meaning: it is through these twenty-four substances that the Self has spread out Its Maya and has Itself dressed Itself up in the garb of the universe/creation. All of this is verily He. Thus, in His state of being a jiva [individual being], He, through His Own Will to be deluded, sees himself to be separate from the Self. Even though one becomes deluded by different perceptions of the various element-filled forms, one actually is taking in the “One 'I'” Itself. But because there is, instead of the perception of the One, the perception of the many, in that person's mind, that person has to remain in the “many-ness” according to his/her belief in the “many.” That person cannot merge with the Oneness. When the coverings of red, blue, etc. types of colored glass are removed – just as the different kinds of light come to an end and the true form of the one light shines forth – similarly, if one, through steadfast belief – meaning: with certainty of intellect – knows oneself as “I” and takes up Layayoga [the yoga of merging], everything automatically is dissolved. Then,“I am truly 'I'” - this Knowledge comes and “madbhAvamAgata” [attaining My State] happens.