### Prose 
 --- 
यदृच्छया चोपपन्नं स्वर्गद्वारमपावृतम् |
सुखिन: क्षत्रिया: पार्थ लभन्ते युद्धमीदृशम् || 32||
yadṛichchhayā chopapannaṁ swarga-dvāram apāvṛitam
sukhinaḥ kṣhatriyāḥ pārtha labhante yuddham īdṛiśham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Partha [Arjuna]! “Sukhi” [happy] are the Kshatriyas to have such a war, which has appeared on its own, unsought, and which is like a door to heaven.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Sukha”: “su” = beautiful; “shubha” [beneficent]; “kha” = “shunya” [void; emptiness]. Earth, water, fire, air, ether – these are the five “somethings.” Whatever has a beginning, end and middle – that is a “something.” The non-existence of this/these “something/s” is “shunya” [void] – meaning: no-thing[s]. The fulfillment of lack – meaning: obtaining the thing to be obtained, or the fulfilling of want, is “shubha” [beneficent]. Whatever want there is – that is only because of the need to have peace. The unbroken, non-tri-guna state is Peace. Because all of the “matrasparsha” ([see] Chapter 2, sloka 14) are endowed with the attributes of arising and ending, and because they are impermanent, they cannot give peace. But because the Self is Eternal, simply by leaving the worldly experiences and coming to It, one receives Peaceful Bliss. This Peaceful state, devoid of worldly experiences, is verily “sukha” [happiness]. The one who enjoys this “sukha” - it is only that person that is “sukhi” [one who is happy]. The one who is a Kshatriya – meaning: the one who is valiant in protecting the revelation of the Light of the Self, and “sukhi” [as well] – it is only that person who has the opportunity for such a war. This is because it has come about without any effort. The happy sadhak, endowed with the Kshatriya-vritti [righteous warrior aspect], can see through the inner vision that the vrittis [active tendencies] of mind are automatically ([meaning:] even without trying) running about with all kinds of worldly ways and are trying to divert the sadhak from the Self-Substance. And more, it is like a door to heaven – meaning: the open door to the Path of the Self. This is because: the sadhak that has gone up to a high level – it is only that sadhak that knows that if the “I am the body idea” – destroying subtle prana is driven correctly, that through a blossomed, jewel-filled (like the light of diamond in water) opening, or perforation, the Light of the Self is bursting through like “kotisurya prateekashaṃ chandrakoti susheetalaṃ” [like millions of suns with the beautiful tranquility of millions of moons]; this can be seen. That is why the Lord is saying, “O Partha! It is by great fortune that one gets the opportunity for this kind of war (Kriya).”