### Prose 
 --- 
मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु |
मामेवैष्यसि सत्यं ते प्रतिजाने प्रियोऽसि मे || 65||
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
mām evaiṣhyasi satyaṁ te pratijāne priyo ‘si me

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Have mind on Me, be devoted to Me, offer to Me, bow to Me. You will indeed attain Me. You are dear to Me. (For this reason,) truly I promise [this to you].

### Commentary 
 --- 
Just previously, the Lord said, “tamabhyarchya siddhiṃ vindati mAnava” [worshipping Him, the human being attains perfection], and therefore, “tameva sharaNaṃ gacchha” [go surrender unto Him]; now He is saying “manmanA bhava” [have mind on Me] etc. By this, He is explaining that that “Him,” the One that I am calling “Ishvara” [God], the One from Whom all beings/phenomena have come forth, by Whom all of this is pervaded – that “Him” is actually this “Me.” He is “I” – “So’ham” [I am That; I am He]. This knowledge – So’ham – is most secret. There is no way this knowledge can be explained. If that State is not attained, it cannot be known/understood. It is known only by one’s own Awareness! The knowledge known by one’s own Awareness is that which is secret, because that cannot be expressed in language. Among all of the knowledge known by one’s own Awareness that there is – this is the most secret of all or: this is the most secret of them all]. This is so because this [knowledge] is the final one. After this, the “I” disappears, and there is no knowable and knowledge that remains.
 
Teaching the knowledge of So’ham in the guise of conversation, the Lord brings together the essence of attained knowledge and practice – the essence of the entire [Bhagavad] Gita – in this sloka [verse]. He is showing that after this sadhana [spiritual practice], there are four stages, one after the other – meaning: [in ascending order] “mana”/”manas” [mind], “buddhi” [intellect], “ahamkar} [ego], chitta [personal consciousness] of the antahkarana – the four types of Kriya that are performed in these sequentially ascending fields. The four types of Kriya are as follows.
 
First: “manmanA bhava” [keep mind on Me] – in “Me” – meaning: fix the mind in Kutastha Chaitanya – meaning: do the Kriya of the field of mind/manas. The Ajna-chakra is that which is the field of mind/manas, or “Tapoloka,” the junction-place of the field of knowledge and the field of ignorance. Another name for it is “Manas-chakra.” The center of it is called “Kuta” or “Kutastha.” The lower side of that Kutastha is the place of mind/manas and the field of action, whose presiding deity is “Chandrama” or the moon. And the upper side [of Kutastha] is the place of intellect/buddhi and the field of devotion, whose presiding deity is “Savita” or sun. The nadi [subtle passageway] of the sun is called “pingala.” Another name for it is “Kalindi” or the Yamuna river. That is what is there within those two sides. Kutastha Chaitanya is indeed Akshara Purush [Indestructible Person]. Brahmaa, Vishnu, Shiva, Rama, Krishna, Durga, Kali etc. are forms of Its states. It is God Himself. It is the Supreme Lord Sri Krishna. He has two eyes, one is that “Chandrama” and the other is that “Savita.” In the yoga of action in the field of action, He is Grace; and in the yoga of devotion in the field of devotion, He is Love. This is His “Lila” [mystic play].
 
In sadhana, He is the slayer of the asura [demon] “Kangsa” [demon king], who symbolizes the cause of bondage to samsara for the sadhak. That is why there is the prayer of the sadhak: “kṛShNah karotu kalyANaṃ kaṃsakunjarakesharee; kalindeejala kallola kolahala kutuhalah” [O Krishna, bless me/us, [You Who is] the lion to elephant Kangsa, [You Who] sports with joyful cheer and celebration in the waters of the Yamuna river].
 
The six chakras are indeed [those chakras] that are from the Muladhar-chakra to the Chandrama in the Ajna-chakra. Doing yogic practice/Kriya (pranayam, purification of ida and pingala, piercing the knots, etc.) in those six chakras is indeed that which is called “manmana” [mind on Me] in the [Bhagavad Gita]. (Those practices are of the karma-yoga aspect [yoga of doing spiritual practice] –  named “Tapah” [disciplines] – of Kriyayoga in the philosophy of Patanjali – meaning: “yama” [dont’s], “niyama” [do’s], “asana” [posture], “pranayam” [yogic breathing], “pratyahar” [mind withdrawal], “dharana” [concentration], “dhyan” [meditation] and “samadhi” [absorption]. In Vedic devotions, that [same discipline is called] is pranayam or the rite of “Aghomarshana.” And in “Rasalila” [Sri Krishna’s pastimes], this is the “searching for Krishna.”)
 
Second: “madbhaktah bhava” [be devoted to Me] – upon piercing Kutastha and rising up to the upper side, do the practice/Kriya of the field of buddhi. Be My (the Indestructible Being’s) devotee. Be attached only to Me – meaning: after fixing mind on Me, bring the mind under control according to the following method: “yatah yatah nischarati tatastatah niyamyaitat Atmani eva vashaṃ nayet” [this is an abbreviated statement from the original sloka 6:26 of the Bhagavad Gita; translation of the abbreviation is: whenever and wherever the mind wanders, one should bring it back continually/regularly and bring it under the control of the Self] (this is that which is the “action” part of bhakti [devotion]), and thereby, take the mind’s [tendencies of] attachment and addiction onto the path of bhakti-yoga [yoga of devotion], and while taking up devotion to Vaishnavi-Shakti, throw it solely into Me – that Chaitanya Purush [Consciousness-Person] that is in the middle of that Sun-Sphere. Do not put your mind on anything else whatsoever. The spiritual practice of meditating after taking up this Vaishnavi-Shakti is the spiritual practice of the field of intellect/buddhi. When She is pleased, perfection is attained. “SaiShA prasannA nṛNAṃ bhavati muktaye” [Her being pleased leads to being Emancipated]. (This is indeed the spiritual practice of “svadhyaya” [thorough observation of the Divine], the “knowledge” part of bhakti, the “Suryopasthan” and “Gayatri” of the Vedic devotions, and in “Rasalila,” the act of witnessing the Self, with the Devotion-Goddess and the Gopis seeing the form of “manmatha-manmatha.”)
 
Third: “madyAjee bhava” [be in such a way that you offer to Me] – as soon as devotion blossoms, the desires and longings turn around, go in the direction of God, and transform to love (love towards God). At that time, one has to rise to the field of oneself, or the field of the ego/ahamkar, and become “madyaji” [offer to Me]. One has to offer the oblation of oneself [ego] to the Self (the final spiritual act of devotion is the offering of oneself). That is the “madyaji” state. That is why the Lord is saying, “Be ‘madyaji’” – meaning: worship Me with mantra – meaning: the mantra of mine that is called “Pranava” – utter that Pranava, and with that, offer unto Me the ego, mind and energy as oblations. (This is the “vigyan” [applied knowledge] part within the bhakti [devotion] aspect in the “svadhyaya” practice of the philosophy of Patanjali, the “Atma-raksha” rite of the Vedic devotions – meaning: the act of keeping the Self on top of the self (the ego/ahamkar) – (keeping oneself with the Supreme God), and, in Rasalila, each of the Gopis servicing or worshipping Sri Krishna as He sits on the clothes that He has taken away from them.)
 
After that, the fourth: “mAṃ namaskuru” [bow to Me] – one has to do the Kriya of “namaskar” [bowing] upon rising up from the field of ego to the field of chitta [personal consciousness]. That is indeed the practice of stopping the waves in consciousness. That is why the Lord is saying, “mAṃ namaskuru.” Bow to Me, with joined hands, and with the head bow towards Me – meaning: after going through the previously mentioned three stages and having come near Me and being in the same state, look at Me with a steady eye, unite the power of action and the power of knowledge – make it non-doing/non-effortful. As soon as these two operative powers unite, right then, the state of equilibrium will come about. The senses will only become inoperative. There will be no vision. Non-vision will come. Until practice matures, this seeing and not seeing will happen repeatedly. This is that which is “namaskar.” Do this, verily. (This is the act of “Ishvara pranidhan” [surrendering to God] in the philosophy of Patanjali, the “Rudropasthan” rite of the Vedic devotions, and the aspect of “rasotsava” [ecstatic celebration] in Rasalila – the springing forth of Bliss that comes from the union with God that happens after the waves in consciousness are stopped – that.)
 
After that the fifth, or final fruit: “mAmevaiShyasi” [to Me in this way you shall go] – You will indeed attain Me. You will come into Me and merge and become “I”. You will attain the state of “So’ham.” This is an absolute truth. There is no this way or that way with this. If one has become dear, this will happen inevitably. (This is “upanishad” – meaning: “upa” = near; “ni” = in “nischaya” [certainty], without fail; “sad” – going – that by which one can go – that event.)
 
The essential simple meaning of the sloka is this:
 
The work of the mind is “vikalpa” (relinquishing) and “sankalpa” (grasping). Make your mind let go of the worldly experience and have it grab a hold of “I”. Just as a devotee – meaning: worshipper – takes on the form and qualities of the worshipped gods upon engaging mind and energy and merging with them – you too, merge mind and energy into “I” (the Kriya is learned from guru’s teachings), and become “I”. Bow to “I” Itself (the bowing happens from the same to the same) – meaning: unite yourself with the Self. I am vowing to you truly, O dear one of “I”!  You will become “I”. Your Liberation is inevitable.