### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
ऊर्ध्वमूलमध:शाखमश्वत्थं प्राहुरव्ययम् |
छन्दांसि यस्य पर्णानि यस्तं वेद स वेदवित् || 1||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
ūrdhva-mūlam adhaḥ-śhākham aśhvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam
chhandānsi yasya parṇāni yas taṁ veda sa veda-vit

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The ashvattha tree [a type of fig tree, considered sacred in India] with its roots on top, and the branches below is called “avyaya” [indestructible; inexhaustible], all of the metric rhymes of which are the leaves. The one who knows that ashvattha tree – that is the one who is knowledgeable about the meaning of the Vedas.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The statement in Chapter 14, sloka 27 [of the Bhagavad Gita] that was made – “brahmaNo hi pratiShThAham” [I AM the Foundation of Brahman] – how is that “I”? Dressing up this body as the ashvattha tree [a type of fig tree, considered sacred in India] – so that the jiva [embodied soul], with its very limited intelligence, can quickly grasp the [meaning of the] word “I” – that effort is being made within the consciousness of self-knowledge and self-enquiry.
 
Samsara [life in the world as a whole] is like a tree. It is full of embodied living beings. That is why samsara is called “jiva-jagat” [the world of embodied living beings]. The Avyakta [non-apparent source], Brahman’s Maya-power, is the root cause of samsara. The expanse of the work [of Maya], beginning from this root cause, has become Mahat-tattva, ego, tanmatras [source of the senses] etc. – the different branches of this work. These are the presiding places of gods, demons, celestial musicians, half-gods, humans, animals, birds, creepers, flying insects – different types of living beings. Thus, the places of the branches of the tree of living beings in samsara are in “Hiranyagarbha” [golden womb] and such. The upper/higher place in the body for all of these living beings is the head. The brahmarandhra in that head is the abode of that Maya-endowed Brahman. It is from that that the expanse of the work [of Maya] has transformed into: categories of Mahat-tattva, ego, tanmatras etc.; and with the process of the 24 substances, the seven heavens and the seven netherworlds together; as well as the particular physical forms of hands/arms, feet, fingers [and such] – [all] as branches spreading out in the downward direction. It is for this reason that samsara (the body of the living being) is said to have the root up above and the branches below. The jiva [embodied being] inevitably will end. It is alive today, will it be alive tomorrow? No, there is nothing certain about it. That is why samsara is called “ashvattha” ([meaning:] that which has no possibility of settledness until the next dawn) – meaning: destroyable in a [or: any] moment. As the body of this jiva is bound to continual destruction, that inevitable end continues to happen. It has no end, no diminution. It is like the current of the river. Some water comes into the river; right then it goes towards the sea. And in its place, right then some more water comes in. That also goes. And again more water comes. In this way, due to the nonstop coming and going of water, the flow of the river (current) just does not end. One bit of water does not stay in one place, that is true, but the water of the river in the form of the current has become unending, non-diminishing, and does not empty out. In the world of jivas, the current of jivas is like that – unending, non-diminishing, and does not empty out. That is why this samsara is called “avyaya” [non-diminishing]. The metric rhymes are like the leaves of this tree. The metric rhymes are “Veda” – meaning: the operations of whatever is “known.” The matters of this “knowing” are two: karma [acts] and jnana [knowledge/wisdom]. The creation, which is the emergence of the state of being of phenomena or of a living being, is called “karma” (see Chapter 8 of Bhagavad Gita) – meaning: with the outgoing and incoming processes of the 24 substances, inside and outside, all of the mixed and unmixed operations that can take place – all of that is “karma” [activity as a whole]. This karma is that which is “vijnana” [knowledge at work]. And knowing the nature and relationship of Prakritic substances and the Substance of the Self is “jnana” [spiritual knowledge]. That by which this karma and jnana can be known – that is that which is “Veda.” The matters of the Vedas are of the three gunas, and they are divided into Rik, Yaju, Sama and Atharva – these four parts. (See the commentary to Chapter 2, sloka 45 [of the Pranab Gita].) Samsara is covered with the tri-guna-filled karma and jnana of the Vedas. That is why the Vedas are like the leaves of the tree of samsara. The leaves bring beauty to the tree, and display the aliveness of that being [in this case: the tree]. Karma and jnana, in the same way, bring beauty to samsara, and show the aliveness of the embodied being. The leaves protect the tree and bring shade. Living beings suffering from the heat of the sun get relief/peace upon coming to that shade, but the covering of the leaves [while one is in the shade], covers up the mind/heart-intoxicating, deep blue of the great sky, the infinitely expansive, immaculate glory. The Vedas too, in the form of the shade of karma and jnana, keep the existence of samsara going, and the jiva, upon coming to the refuge of that karma and jnana, gets relief/peace from the suffering of the three pressures. But, because the Vedas are of the matters of the three gunas – if one stays in the refuge of the Vedas, one cannot have the completely Pure Bliss of the non-tri-guna-state. The mind/heart and life do not merge into the Infinite, Inexhaustible Glory. One has to remain with the three gunas, under Prakritic control, losing oneself in the operations of jnana and karma. The one who, through the grace of sadguru, has attained the Knowledge of the Self, and through the vision of Knowledge, knows the tree of samsara (the body), with its root, branches and leaves, in the aforementioned way – if one truly sees/understands it – that one is the knower of the meaning of the Vedas. — Begin Footnote. — God Himself is the Knower of the Vedas. This is known because later, in sloka 15 [of this Chapter 15 of the Bhagavad Gita] there is [the statement] “vedavideva cAham” [I am the knower of the Vedas as well]. But, the sadhak too – just as he/she attains the state of “knower of the field” through spiritual progress – in the same way, he/she becomes the knower of the Vedas. (See footnote on page 217. [This reference to page 217 is written in the original; however, there is no such reference in page 217 of the copy of the Pranab Gita used by the translators; it is possible that the author meant the first footnote to sloka 39 of Chapter 3.] — End Footnote. —