### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
अशोच्यानन्वशोचस्त्वं प्रज्ञावादांश्च भाषसे |
गतासूनगतासूंश्च नानुशोचन्ति पण्डिता: || 11||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
aśhochyān-anvaśhochas-tvaṁ prajñā-vādānśh cha bhāṣhase
gatāsūn-agatāsūnśh-cha nānuśhochanti paṇḍitāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
[The Lord said:] You [Arjuna] are grieving over things which are not to be grieved over, and at the same time, you are also speaking like a knowledgeable person. But knowledgeable people do not grieve over anyone at all – whether alive or dead.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Those who abide in the “paravastha” of Kriya [“paravastha” = poise after Kriya; or the “post-Kriya state”], they do not see restlessness/movement or stillness (“alive or dead”) - nothing at all. You [Arjuna] are not abiding in that Settledness, yet you are speaking about that abidance. But everything [you are experiencing now] is in a restless and unsettled state.
 
In the daily practice of Kriya, one must not get up and leave the asana [seat and seated posture] right after finishing Kriya; instead, one has to sit for a while in a settled posture and focus on Kutastha with a one-pointed mind. No other kind of Kriya should be done [at this time]. At that time, due to “accumulation” from the practice of Kriya, the mind forgets about the external things and sees and hears supernatural happenings in the inner world[s]. For as long as this state remains – for that long is the “paravastha” of Kriya. During the time-span of the experience of this state, the sadhak goes on gaining Knowledge/Wisdom. For this reason, he/she becomes like a “pandit” [knowledgeable person]. When Perfection is attained in sadhana, this state becomes permanent; it never breaks again. Then there is nothing over which to grieve. Directly realizing the matters of phenomena, such as creation-sustenance-destruction etc., the sadhak then attains the Bliss-filled, “no-grief” state. But for as long as Perfection is not attained, because of which the Universal Form is not seen – for that long, during the waking state, that state of being a “pandit” comes up to the mind only as a shadow [of the real state]. The real “no-grief” state does not come. Yes, one may speak like a pandit, but the weakness of the heart does not go away. It is that very condition – being experienced here by Arjuna – that is being pointed out in this sloka.