### Prose 
 --- 
उदारा: सर्व एवैते ज्ञानी त्वात्मैव मे मतम् |
आस्थित: स हि युक्तात्मा मामेवानुत्तमां गतिम् || 18||
udārāḥ sarva evaite jñānī tvātmaiva me matam
āsthitaḥ sa hi yuktātmā mām evānuttamāṁ gatim

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
All of these [four types of good beings] are “udaara” [see definition and explanation in the commentary below]. But in My view, the jnani is actually the Self Itself, as the jnani, having become united with the Self, has taken shelter in Me, the Highest Destiny.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Udaara” = “ut” + “aa” + “ṛ” + “a” – “ṛ” + “a” = “ra” which means “that which goes forth”; “aa” means the opposite of something. Thus: “aa” + “ra” = “aara,” which means “that which goes forth without opposition.” “Ut” means “above” – [meaning:] above Maya. “Ut” + “aara” = “udaara,” which means “that which goes above without opposition” – meaning: the one who, having cut apart the Prakritic covering, comes up above, or can come up above – the one who is able to do so without any hindrances – that is the one who is “udaara.” Now, “arta,” “jijnasu,” “artharthi” and “jnani” [see sloka 7:16 for definitions] – they are all “udaara” (elevated). This is because all of them have abandoned the Prakritic material world and have solely taken recourse in the Reality of the Supreme Self. Therefore, as they follow the method in sloka 14 [of this Chapter 7], they do not get covered by the veil of Maya. All of them are dear to God. But, the jnani is somewhat special. “Arta,” “jijnasu” and “artharthi” – these three are not “ekbhakti” [see sloka 7:17]. This is because all of these take recourse in God  with the desire to fulfill a goal. But the jnani has no desire. For the jnani, the “Param” [Supreme], or the Supreme Self, is all. The Supreme Self Parambrahman [Supreme Absolute] is the Highest Destination. There is no other destination beyond It. The jnani, with mind united in the Self, has taken shelter in this Supreme Destination. No other thing whatsoever finds a place in the jnani's heart. That is why the jnani is the Evident Self, or the Self Itself. 