### Prose 
 --- 
ऊर्ध्वं गच्छन्ति सत्त्वस्था मध्ये तिष्ठन्ति राजसा: |
जघन्यगुणवृत्तिस्था अधो गच्छन्ति तामसा: || 18||
ūrdhvaṁ gachchhanti sattva-sthā madhye tiṣhṭhanti rājasāḥ
jaghanya-guṇa-vṛitti-sthā adho gachchhanti tāmasāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Persons with predominantly sattvic tendencies go upward. Persons who are rajas-predominant stay in the middle. And the tamasic (deluded) ones, established in madness, delusion and such, go downward.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Those who practice sattva guna attain the upper destinations (from the lower levels of heaven to enjoying abodes such as the Sphere of Vishnu etc., even up to merging with Brahman). The sporting ground of this begins at the Ajna-chakra, [going] in the upward direction. If there is rajoguna, it forces one to act, due to being under the power of embedded desires. That is why they go neither up nor down, but do their coming and going [take births and deaths] in the middle plane (the karmic plane of humans), due to being enslaved by birth and death. Its sporting ground is Anahata.

The lower front area of the loins is called “jaghan” [place of vileness]. The sporting ground of tamoguna is the “Kampur-chakra” [lust-center]. Because this is in the place of “jaghan,” it is “jaghanya” [vile; of “jaghan”; see second line of above sloka for occurrence of the word]. The manifested forms of “kama” [lust] and “rati” [coition] reside in this chakra. The one in whose antahkarana [inner being] the activities of this “kama” and “rati” do their sporting – that one is said to be “jaghanyavrittistha” [established in vile nature]. This being’s attention, instead of being in the upward direction, is in the downward direction, because of which, [this being] attains the lower destinations. (See the commentary to Chapter 1, sloka 1 [of the Pranab Gita].)