### Prose 
 --- 
यावानर्थ उदपाने सर्वत: सम्प्लुतोदके |
तावान्सर्वेषु वेदेषु ब्राह्मणस्य विजानत: || 46||
yāvān artha udapāne sarvataḥ samplutodake
tāvānsarveṣhu vedeṣhu brāhmaṇasya vijānataḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
As much as there is the need for an “udapana” (place holding a small amount of water) when a flood has covered everything completely with water, the brahmin with the Knowledge of Brahman has that much need of all of the Vedas (the Vedic rites).

### Commentary 
 --- 
When the water of a deluge floods the entire land, the water from ponds, wells, swamps, rivers and such “udapana” (pits holding water) merge with the water of the flood, and all water becomes one big water. There is no more difference in their names and forms, and because their pits are under the floodwater and cannot be seen, they also do not have any separate existence on the outside. At that time, whatever the necessities of water there may be, all are met by that one mass of water. But because the depth is not the same in every area of the floodwater, if there is the need to access deep water to carry out a particular task, one has to go to places where the pits of those ponds, wells, rivers are present, and use the pit at that place. It is like when an enormous thing has to be submerged, or if a big boat or a ship has to be floated, such things have to be submerged or floated in a place where there is a [deep] hole or where the pit or cavern is deep. Like the “artha” [function – see beginning of sloka for “yavanartha”] (usefulness) that is there for those watering holes or waterways at the time of the flood – just like that is the usefulness of Vedic rites for the “vijanata” [knowing] brahmin. The one who gets to know the All-Knowing via sadhana – meaning: the one who becomes knowledgeable about Vedas in the path of yoga, and goes to the final place of the knowable at the State of Vishnu-ness – it is only that person who is the Brahman-based, master of jnana and vijnana, possessor of the eight siddhis - “vijnata brahmin.” It is only that sadhak who is “nishkama” [without desire]. That person has no desire or need of anything for him/herself – at all. That person ever abides in Completeness in the Bliss of Brahman, and only carries out the journey of the body because of prarabdha karma [karma determining the body's lifespan], and nothing more. That person is devoid of the three gunas. And because of knowing Brahman, he/she is “Brahman-knower” or “knower of all.” That all-knowing person's Knowledge covers up the knowledge of the Vedic rites, and thereby the knowledge of the Vedic rites go into that sadhak's Total Knowledge and become one. Those [Vedic knowledge] have no more separate existence; therefore, no separate use for them remains either. But for the benefit of the “traigunya” [that which is of the three gunas] or the “world,” many times these [realized] persons have to take part in the traigunya concerns. But, even though they are able to accomplish every task/act with their own power, they do not always use that power. This is because: if that power is used there is a chance of being bound to karma! For that reason, in order to teach people, they take the help of brahmins who have the authority to perform rites, and carry out the Vedic rites according to the injunctions in the scriptures, awakening the powers of mantras – only so that there is success and help for people in the society and people who are in need, or for the sake of disciples.