### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
अनाश्रित: कर्मफलं कार्यं कर्म करोति य: |
स संन्यासी च योगी च न निरग्निर्न चाक्रिय: || 1||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
anāśhritaḥ karma-phalaṁ kāryaṁ karma karoti yaḥ
sa sannyāsī cha yogī cha na niragnir na chākriyaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The Lord said, “The one who does not attach oneself to the fruits of actions and just performs actions that are to be done – that is the one who is a sannyasi and a yogi. Just by being without [ritual] fire (outside) and not performing rites does not make one a sannyasi or a yogi.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
[After speaking about the matters of karmayoga and sannyas-yoga in Chapter 5, [then] in the last three slokas [of that chapter], He summed up, very succinctly and speaking with revealing aphorisms, all that there is to be said regarding the matters of yoga from beginning to end. But how is sadhana to be done on all that; how is it to be brought into practice? He did not speak about that in those slokas. That is why He is breaking down the matters of the discipline of practice and speaking about it in Chapter 6. It is for this reason that this chapter is called “Abhyasayoga” [the yoga of practice]. — Begin Footnote. — This chapter is also called “Dhyanayoga” [the yoga of meditation]. That is why Sridharswami has said, “chitte shuddho'pi na dhyAnaṃ vinA saṃnyAsamAtratah; muktih syaditi ShaShTho'smidhyAnayogah vitanyAte.” [Even if the chitta [heart/mind] has been purified, it is not possible to attain Emancipation without meditation and by mere renunciation. Thus “dhyanayoga” [the yoga of meditation] has been taught in the sixth chapter.] — End Footnote. — Previously, it has been said — Begin Footnote. — Previously, it has been said — Begin Footnote. — See the commentary in Chapter 3, sloka 17, and the footnote to sloka 19 [of Chapter 3]. — End Footnote. — that the moving of prana within, during the practice of Kriya, is called “karma” [yogic act], and the external work that has to be done in order to carry on physical life because of the influence of prarabdha [karma associated with incarnation] is called “karya” [work]. The one who performs this karya and karma but does not crave the fruits of such, surrenders all of the fruits of such to Vasudeva [the Lord; Sri Krishna], does not take even a bit of that on him/herself, and is completely detached [from such fruits of karya and karma] – that one is both “sannyasi” [ended; renunciate] and yogi at the same time. In “Shruti” [Vedas; Upanishads] and “Smriti” [all other scriptures of the Hindu tradition] and the scriptures of yoga, the way of being a sannyasi and yogi by being “niragni” [without fire] and “akriya” [without work] has been stated. Dear sadhak! When you are fully absorbed in unobstructed Kriya in the path of the chitta, exactly through the middle of the brahmanadi in order to unite the Kulakundalini to Supreme Shiva and again reestablish Her in the Muladhar – it is only at that time that the fruits of karma cannot touch you. And also after that, at the end of Kriya, for as long as you take on external affairs while you are drunk in that intoxication – for that time as well, the fruits of karma cannot touch you. This state of yours is that which is called “the state of having the fruits of karma happen without taking them on.” The person for whom this [state] goes on endlessly (unbrokenly) and does not break from time to time – it is that person that can be called “sannyasi” and “yogi.” Otherwise, not performing the dutiful fire rites such as offerings, worship at the transitory times of the day and such, and other obligatory rites like funeral rites for ancestors and such, and serving one's belly with other people's cooking (begging) without making any effort, being lazy and indolent and secretly enjoying worldly things mentally and fooling people – one cannot become a yogi or a sannyasi in this way. Know for sure: the feeling of the heat of the sun itself is “touching fire” and just looking once again at the worldly matters that the senses take in makes you not be a sannyasi or a yogi. — End Footnote. — that the moving of prana within, during the practice of Kriya, is called “karma” [yogic act], and the external work that has to be done in order to carry on physical life because of the influence of prarabdha [karma associated with incarnation] is called “karya” [work]. The one who performs this karya and karma but does not crave the fruits of such, surrenders all of the fruits of such to Vasudeva [the Lord; Sri Krishna], does not take even a bit of that on him/herself, and is completely detached [from such fruits of karya and karma] – that one is both “sannyasi” [ended; renunciate] and yogi at the same time. In “Shruti” [Vedas; Upanishads] and “Smriti” [all other scriptures of the Hindu tradition] and the scriptures of yoga, the way of being a sannyasi and yogi by being “niragni” [without fire] and “akriya” [without work] has been stated. Dear sadhak! When you are fully absorbed in unobstructed Kriya in the path of the chitta, exactly through the middle of the brahmanadi in order to unite the Kulakundalini to Supreme Shiva and again reestablish Her in the Muladhar – it is only at that time that the fruits of karma cannot touch you. And also after that, at the end of Kriya, for as long as you take on external affairs while you are drunk in that intoxication – for that time as well, the fruits of karma cannot touch you. This state of yours is that which is called “the state of having the fruits of karma happen without taking them on.” The person for whom this [state] goes on endlessly (unbrokenly) and does not break from time to time – it is that person that can be called “sannyasi” and “yogi.” Otherwise, not performing the dutiful fire rites such as offerings, worship at the transitory times of the day and such, and other obligatory rites like funeral rites for ancestors and such, and serving one's belly with other people's cooking (begging) without making any effort, being lazy and indolent and secretly enjoying worldly things mentally and fooling people – one cannot become a yogi or a sannyasi in this way. Know for sure: the feeling of the heat of the sun itself is “touching fire” and just looking once again at the worldly matters that the senses take in makes you not be a sannyasi or a yogi.