### Prose 
 --- 
दूरेण ह्यवरं कर्म बुद्धियोगाद्धनञ्जय |
बुद्धौ शरणमन्विच्छ कृपणा: फलहेतव: || 49||
dūreṇa hy-avaraṁ karma buddhi-yogād dhanañjaya
buddhau śharaṇam anvichchha kṛipaṇāḥ phala-hetavaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Dhananjaya [Arjuna]! Because action without “buddhiyoga” [with engaged intellect] is very low/inferior, take recourse in the intellect. Those who crave outcomes are misers.

### Commentary 
 --- 
If one takes up some task in the world without putting one's mind into it (without “manoyoga” [engagement of mind]), just as that work does not get carried out in a proper way – in sadhana it is the same; if the act is performed without the intellect (without “buddhiyoga” [engagement of intellect]), that work (Kriya) does not at all take hold – meaning: there is no leaving the external orientation and having internal orientation. There is no leaving the worldly experience and diving into Brahman. The function/work of the intellect is “vichara” [enquiry/analysis] – meaning: this is not the Self, that is not the Self, those are not the Self – continually casting off everything in this way, and gradually becoming steady in attention on the Self. If the intellect does come to that kind of steadiness during the act, the company of the worldly experiences is not left behind. Thus in this case, according to the rules of “sangAt sanjAyate kAmah” [desires exist according to the company one keeps] and such, the intellect gets destroyed, and one has to fall. Therefore, without buddhiyoga [engagement of the intellect], the true fruit of the act cannot be brought out by only performing the act alone. For this reason it [the act] is low/inferior.