### Prose 
 --- 
नासतो विद्यते भावो नाभावो विद्यते सत: |
उभयोरपि दृष्टोऽन्तस्त्वनयोस्तत्त्वदर्शिभि: || 16||
nāsato vidyate bhāvo nābhāvo vidyate sataḥ
ubhayorapi dṛiṣhṭo ’nta stvanayos tattva-darśhibhiḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Asat [the untrue] does not exist; the existence of Sat [Truth] also cannot be denied. The “tattva-darshis” [wise seers] have seen into the farthest depths of both of these.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Tattva” = the essence of “vastu” [substances]. “Vastu” are of two types – Sat [True] and asat [untrue]. Sat = Atman [Self]; asat = everything except that Atman/Self – meaning: the substances from the 24 divisions of the sectionalized Prakriti are also known as “avastu” [non-substances]. Perception is of two types, “anuloma” [in a natural direction – typically analogous with hair] and “viloma” [in the opposite of a natural direction – typically analogous with hair]. Looking from the root to the tip [of the hair [analogously] – meaning: outward] is “viloma” perception. This is “creation-orientation.” Looking from the tip to the root [of the hair [analogously] – meaning: inward] is “anuloma” perception. This is “Liberation-orientation.” Because one's perception is towards the tip in creation-orientation, it [perception] gets covered all over by the darkness of ignorance due to the turmoil of the many waves of worldly experiences. The True Form of the Self is not seen. When one is in Liberation-orientation and acting from that, the search for the “cause” is continuous, and perception becomes locked in the “root” alone. That is why, through the Light of Knowledge, the witnessing of the True Form of the Self goes on happening. Then both of the “panchikrita” [quintuplicated; created by “the five”] and the “apanchikrita” [non-quintuplicated; uncreated by “the five” - such as: mind] versions of the five primal elements change from the physical to the very subtle state, and one comes to know the following transformations: how earth merges into water, water into fire, fire into air, air into space/ether, space/ether into the tanmatras [the source of the senses] etc. After the perception of a separate existence of all of these is ended, only “karan” [cause] remains. This can be seen. Within that “karan” is the “Beeja” [Seed]. That [Seed] has no cause. It has no kind of erosion, expansion or change. This Seed is, verily, Sat [Truth]. Those who are “tattva-darshis” [seers] from the perception of Liberation-orientation – they know the final truth of both Sat and asat – meaning: they know that asat has no separate existence of its own. Existence is only Sat's.