### Prose 
 --- 
युक्त: कर्मफलं त्यक्त्वा शान्तिमाप्नोति नैष्ठिकीम् |
अयुक्त: कामकारेण फले सक्तो निबध्यते || 12||
yuktaḥ karma-phalaṁ tyaktvā śhāntim āpnoti naiṣhṭhikīm
ayuktaḥ kāma-kāreṇa phale sakto nibadhyate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The united person, having abandoned [the expectations of] the fruits of actions, attains Steady Peace. The non-united person, being desirous and attached to the outcome of the fruits of actions, falls into the bondage of karma.

### Commentary 
 --- 
[The kinds of states that are attained by the sadhak by following the methodology stated in the 10th sloka [of this Chapter 5] and by doing the types of practices/works addressed in the 11th sloka [of this Chapter 5] – that is being spoken about in four slokas – 12 through 15 [of this Chapter 5] – meaning: first being “yukta” [united], then “naisthiki-shanti-prapti” [the attainment of Steady Peace], then being “vashi” [controlled], then being “prabhu” [controller; lord], and then becoming “vibhu” [all-pervading] and thereby being “agyana” [state of Not-Knowledge] (meaning: being absolutely complete, because of which one is devoid of all associations).] Offering karma [acts] to Brahman, and then performing [spiritual] yoga with body, mind, intellect and “kevala indriyas” [see commentary to sloka 5:11], all of the fruits of karmas become sacrificed in God (offered to Brahman). Then the sadhak becomes “yukta” [enjoined] - meaning: the four vrittis [functionalities] of his/her antahkarana become completely inward-faced and unite with Kutastha. (This is the Kriya of the “field of mind” within the sadhak. See the commentary in Chapter 4, sloka 7.) At this time, the sadhak goes straight up to Kutastha. No relation remains to that which is below, and the sadhak does not get pulled in any way by the powers that are below. The Peace-filled Bliss that comes about when witnessing Spiritual Truth in this imperturbable state – that is “naishtiki-shanti” [Steady Peace]. This state of “naishtiki-shanti” is the Kriya of the intellectual field. Being purified in oneself in this state, it can be known and seen that if one is not able to be united – meaning: if one is not able to come to the Agya and become still – that Peace-filled state cannot be attained. This is because: in the non-united state (meaning: for as long as one is below the Agya – for that long), because one is drawn by desires rising from the rajoguna, one has to be bound due to attachment to the outcomes of karma [acts]; one loses the way; one cannot rise above.