### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
अभयं सत्त्वसंशुद्धिर्ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थिति: |
दानं दमश्च यज्ञश्च स्वाध्यायस्तप आर्जवम् || 1||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
abhayaṁ sattva-sanśhuddhir jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ
dānaṁ damaśh cha yajñaśh cha svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam

अहिंसा सत्यमक्रोधस्त्याग: शान्तिरपैशुनम् |
दया भूतेष्वलोलुप्त्वं मार्दवं ह्रीरचापलम् || 2||
ahinsā satyam akrodhas tyāgaḥ śhāntir apaiśhunam
dayā bhūteṣhv aloluptvaṁ mārdavaṁ hrīr achāpalam

तेज: क्षमा धृति: शौचमद्रोहोनातिमानिता |
भवन्ति सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातस्य भारत || 3||
tejaḥ kṣhamā dhṛitiḥ śhaucham adroho nāti-mānitā
bhavanti sampadaṁ daivīm abhijātasya bhārata

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharat [Arjuna]! Fearlessness, cheerfulness of mind/heart, abidance in jnana-yoga, charity, self-control, yajna [rites], study of the Vedas, disciplined spiritual practice, righteousness, non-aggression, truthfulness, non-anger, renunciation, peace, non-slanderousness, mercifulness towards all beings, non-lustfulness, gentleness, modesty, being without inconsistent behavior, strength, forgiveness, forbearance, cleanliness, non-malice, and being free of vanity – all of these are the endowments of the “daivas” [divinely oriented beings] who are born to go in the direction towards the Divine.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The statement that was made in the final sloka [verse] of the previous chapter [Chapter 15 of the Bhagavad Gita] – “etabuddhvA buddhimAn syAt kṛtakṛtyashcha bhArata” [having awakened to this, one becomes wise and fulfills what has to be done, O Bharat [Arjuna]] – its clear purport is being shown here – meaning: the natures of the “rakshasas [monstrous beings] and “asuras” [demonic beings] that have been spoken about in the 12th sloka of the 9th Chapter [of the Bhagavad Gita] are those that cause delusion and bondage to the world. And the “daivi/daivic” [divinely oriented] natures spoken about in the 13th sloka of that chapter [9] bring Liberation. How are the characteristics of the divine and demonic natures? That is being stated.

“Abhayam” – means “fearlessness.” Fear is only of death. When the jiva [soul] knows, through the power of sadhana, that “I Am the Supreme Person,” then that being no longer has the fear of death. When in the inner being, during the time that the mutations of Maya such as deceit etc. arise, one behaves from purity anyway, it is then that that state of being can be called “satvasvamshuddhi” [purity of being]. (Chapter 14, sloka 2 [of the Bhagavad Gita].) The peaceful contentment (state of restfulness) that comes about upon knowing the object of knowledge – that is verily “jnana” [knowing]. (See Chapter 9, sloka 1; Chapter 13, slokas 7 through 11; and Chapter 14, sloka 6 [of the Bhagavad Gita].) And the Stillness after the stoppage of the fluctuations in consciousness is called “yoga.” In these two, steadfastness is present. That is why the steadfastness in jnana and yoga is called “jnanayoga vyavasthiti” [the natural settledness in jnana-yoga [or: the natural settledness in jnana and yoga]]. To donate lawfully earned wealth to worthy recipients is called “daan” [charity]. (See Chapter 10, sloka 5 [of the Bhagavad Gita].) “Dama” [self-control] – the stopping of outward-going tendencies. “Yajna” [spiritual act] – yogic act [alternate translation: Kriya yoga] performed as stated in “shruti” [Vedas and Upanishads] and “smriti” [all other scriptures]. To understand the meanings of Vedas and such [scriptures] is called “svadhyaya” [spiritual study]. “Tapah” [disciplined spiritual practice] – to move the antahkarana [mind as a whole] in the True Way through special Kriya. “Arjava” – being clear and simple.
 
“Ahimsa” – in the waking, dream and deep sleep states, the absence of the tendency to cause harm to living beings (Chapter 10, sloka 5 [of the Bhagavad Gita]). “Satya” [truth] – the abandonment of falsehood. The non-arising of the desire to cause harm to others even after they have caused harm to oneself is called “akrodha” [non-anger]. “Tyaga” [renunciation] –  non-attachment. The repose that is in the full withdrawal from Prakritic activities is that which is called “shanti” [peace]. “Apaishunam” – the abandonment of derisive thoughts and speech towards others. Doing things for the beneficence of beings is called “daya” [compassion]. “Alolupata” – being without lustfulness. “Mandarva” – being devoid of guile. The tendency that automatically rises in opposition to, as well as to stop, an evil tendency that has risen, and the feeling of repentance that comes about because of that – that is that which is called “hree” or “modesty.” Not showing any more emotion than is needed for a situation is called “achapalata” [not having excessive agitation].
 
“Tejah” – strength. Even at the time of death, not doing the abominable (shameful) – meaning: not doing any act at the time of death for which one will have to endure derision. “Kshama” [forgiveness] – disregarding harmful acts done by another, even if one has the power to take revenge. “Dhriti” – the power of forbearance. “Shaucha” [purity] – stillness of mind (Chapter 10, sloka 7 [of the Bhagavad Gita]). “Adroha” [non-malice] – abandoning the desire to inflict harm on others. “Natimanita” [non-vanity] – not keeping the need to show others “how I am.”
 
The one for whom these [qualities] are ever-present in their inner being, O Bharat [Arjuna; the sadhak] – that is the one who is said to be born with the endowments of “daivas” [divinely minded beings].