### Prose 
 --- 
वृष्णीनां वासुदेवोऽस्मि पाण्डवानां धनञ्जय: |
मुनीनामप्यहं व्यास: कवीनामुशना कवि: || 37||
vṛiṣhṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañjayaḥ
munīnām apyahaṁ vyāsaḥ kavīnām uśhanā kaviḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
In the lineage of “Vrishnee,” I am “Vasudeva”; among the “Pandava[s],” I am “Dhananjaya”; among the “muni[s],” I am “Vyasa”; and among “kavi[s],” I am “Ushana” [also called “Ushanas”] (“Shukracharya”).

### Commentary 
 --- 
“VṛShNee” – “vrish” = to rain + “ni” = sound denoting doership – meaning: those who make rain, such as clouds. Among them, I am “Vasudeva” [the first “a” is long; the all-pervading One; another name for Sri Krishna]. One in Whom everything resides, and One Who rains on everything – that High Being is “Vasudeva.” Because [Vasudeva/Sri Krishna in physical life] was born in the lineage of “Vrishnee,” it is being said: “in the lineage of Vrishnee.” And the residence-abode of the power that [expands,] sustains and contracts all that is rained upon (all that is creation-preservation-destruction oriented) is “I”. Thus, “I” AM “Vasudeva.” PANDvAnAṃ dhananjayah [“Dhananjaya” among “Pandava[s]”] – among the Earth children of King Pandu, [I am] “Dhananjaya.” The one who was victorious over the Kubera, the lord of “dhana” [wealth], and who had Kunti do worship of Lord Shiva with a “champa” flower made of gold – Lord Shiva bestowed upon him the name of “Dhananjaya” [one who is victorious over wealth/materialism/possessions]. (“Pandava” – see Chapter 1, sloka 1 [of the Pranab Gita][one of the names of Arjuna is “Dhananjaya,” who is a “Pandava”].) The word “Paandaa” means “highly intelligent scholar.” Even among these scholars, “I” am “Dhananjaya” [one who is victorious over wealth/possessions]. The jiva [person] has six types of possessions: birth, death, pleasure, pain, hunger and thirst. One who conquers these six – that one is “Dhananjaya” [ruler of the possessions]. Through doing tapasya [austerities] of Nara Rishi, Arjuna conquered these. Whoever is victorious – that one is also the ruler of the conquered. Thus, Arjuna is the ruler of these. Then again, there is no ruler/governor other than “I”. Thus, “Dhananjaya” is “I” as well. MuneenAmapyahaṃ vyasah – among “muni[s]” [see definition later in this paragraph], I am “Vyasa.” “Vyasa” – the one who creates sections. In the lower part of chitta [personal consciousness] is ahamkar [ego; personal “I”]. It is from this ego that divisions begin – meaning: the “Iness” begins to spread. Thus, “I” am “Vyasa.” (See commentary to sloka 13 in Chapter 10 [of the Pranab Gita].) The word “aham” [“I”] does not signify anyone at all other than “I”. Thus, “Vyasa” is also “I”. “Munih saṃleenamAnasah” [one whose mind is merged [in the Self] is “muni”]. When the mental functionality becomes completely merged [in the Self] (like sugar mixed in with sugar-cane juice) – that is when the meaning of the word “muni” is known. This is a state of Totality. When vrittis [functionalities] begin to operate in this state, there is a perturbation in the totality of the state – meaning: divisions/distinctions of many-ness come into being. Just this knowledge of this sectionalization – this bit of knowledge is called “vyasa.” And the State of Totality that is prior to the arising of this knowledge – that is the State of “I”. And it is in that “I” that the bit of knowledge of separateness exists. It cannot exist without “I”, and because of this, that bit is also “I”. Thus, in the state of “muni,” “I” am the state of “Vyasa.” KaveenAmushanah kavih [among poets, I am the poet “Ushana”; also called “Ushanas”] – one who speaks newly every time – that one is “kavi” [poet]. “Ushanas” – “ush” = to desire + “anas” = doership (along with the first part of the word) – meaning: “one who desires.” Poetness/poetry begins from desire itself. (“Kaviṃ purANam” – see commentary to sloka 9 in Chapter 8 [of the Pranab Gita].) I am the abode where desire resides. “Ushana” [in mythology] is the lord of desires. Thus, among “kavi[s]” [poets; those who create from desire], “I” am “Ushana” [the Lord of desires]. Creation and dissolution – both of these are under the power of desire. Dissolution coming from creation – this – which is happening spontaneously – one cannot experience poetry in this. But the creation that comes out from dissolution – that is where the poetry is. Because this poetry remained as the death-back-to-life power within “Ushana/Ushanas” [mythological poet] (within “Shukracharya” [another name for “Ushana”]) – he was able to even bring the dead back to life. This power too is established in “I”. It is from My death-back-to-life Power that “newness” happens. Now dear sadhak, take a look. The word “shukra” [referring to the other name of “Ushana/Ushanas”; see above paragraph] means: white, potency, purity. And again this Shukra is one-eyed. When the sadhak attains the state of purity, and, rising through a mass of light/power, conquers death – after that, all of the games, from their beginnings to ends, of this world of death, as well as any of the knowledge that there is about immortality – he/she knows all of this, and within him/herself experiences newness at every moment. In this state, the sadhak does not see through the physical eyes. Only the Eye of Knowledge remains open. This state happens when one does not remain under the power of Prakriti but has Prakriti under one’s power. “I” have Prakriti under My Power. Ushana had Prakriti under his power. That is why Ushana is greatest among poets. That which is greatest – That is “I”. Thus, “I” am “Ushana” as well.