### Prose 
 --- 
न च मां तानि कर्माणि निबध्नन्ति धनञ्जय |
उदासीनवदासीनमसक्तं तेषु कर्मसु || 9||
na cha māṁ tāni karmāṇi nibadhnanti dhanañjaya
udāsīna-vad āsīnam asaktaṁ teṣhu karmasu

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Dhananjaya [Arjuna]! I am completely unattached to all of those karmas [activities] and I abide as aloof. None of those karmas can bind me at all.

### Commentary 
 --- 
For as long as karma (the moving of prana through the guru-instructed path) can be done, for that long is there the activity of the rajoguna. The more the activity of rajoguna gets reduced [through the practice], the more does the manifestation of sattva guna take place. For as long as sattva guna goes on being manifested, for that long does rajoguna stay. As soon as the manifestation [of sattva guna] settles, all activities – manifesting or not manifesting – cease, and the revealed remains revealed. This settledness is “tamah.” This is the state that is called “gunatit” [beyond the gunas [primal active principles]]. Karma [actions and their fruits] cannot even touch this. This is a very high state beyond the gunas. Karma does not reach here. I am “udaseenavat” [as aloof] – meaning: I am sitting, just sitting there – above. Sattva, sattva-rajah, rajas-tamah – these are all squirming about below. If I have no attachment to them, they cannot touch Me. I do not have any addiction/attachment, and they do not have any power to make contact. This “touching-contacting” – meaning: the error of contact with the gunas – is that which is called “bondage.” So, I have no contact with the gunas. Therefore, there is no bondage for Me either.