### Prose 
 --- 
तस्मात्त्वमिन्द्रियाण्यादौ नियम्य भरतर्षभ |
पाप्मानं प्रजहि ह्येनं ज्ञानविज्ञाननाशनम् || 41||
tasmāt tvam indriyāṇyādau niyamya bharatarṣhabha
pāpmānaṁ prajahi hyenaṁ jñāna-vijñāna-nāśhanam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O greatest of the Bharatas [Arjuna]! For this reason, control all of the sense-organs first, and completely destroy this desire, which is sinful and the destroyer of “gyana-vigyana” [knowledge and particular knowledge] (completely leave it once and for all).

### Commentary 
 --- 
Just as the light of an oil lamp cannot be lit with oil unless there is a wick, in the same way, if desire does not get the support of the sense-organs and such, there is no enjoying/partaking of the worldly experience. Or, if the wick is dense (stiff and hard), just as the light goes out because the wick cannot absorb the oil into it, in the same way, if all of the sense-organs are controlled (meaning: not letting them go to “vishaya” [the external matters] of the outside and keeping them locked in the “avishaya” [the non-external matters] — Begin Footnote. — All of that which can be seen or heard are of the external. They are experienced only in the physical body. All of that is called “bahirvishaya” [experiences/matters of the outer world]. But, in the practice of yoga, all of that which is seen and heard upon stopping the sense-organs – those are not of the outside; they are of the inside. Because they are extremely subtle, they are experienced in the subtle body. Those are called “antarvishaya” [matters of the inner world]. This “antarvishaya” is the same as “avishaya” [non-external matters]. “Antarvishaya” is Shakti or qualities [such as “tanmatra” - the faculties of experience behind the sense-organs]; “bahirvishaya” is the action/manifestation coming from that [such as the sensory experience]. — End Footnote. —  within), because of the experience of the worldly matters not happening through them [sense-organs], desire automatically gets destroyed; one becomes free of it. This is why the teaching in this sloka is: first the sense-organs have to be brought under control. — Begin Footnote. — In the beginning stages of sadhana, “avishaya” [see note 37 above] cannot even be conceived. At that time, if one keeps one's attention at all times on the path shown by guru, and keeps unwavering faith in guru's words, and practices Kriya according to injunctions like a stupid person, [eventually] the ability comes about to enter within. Later, upon the practice of “samyama,” there is no need for any effort at all. See Chapter 6 [of the Gita] for instructions on practice.  — End Footnote. — It is only then that desire can be destroyed, or cast off. Without destroying or casting off desire, the springing forth of “gyana-vigyana” [knowledge and particular knowledge] is destroyed, and sin, in the form of the restlessness of the worldly experience, grows. “gyana” [knowledge]: “j” = “jayman” [victorious]; “n” = the essence of scent – meaning: the worldly experience; “a” = “asakti” [addiction; attachment]; “n[a]” = “nasti” [non-existence]. The meaning of the letters of “gyana” is: not to have any addiction/attachment to the creation-preservation-destruction endowed earth-bound worldly experience. “Vigyana” [particular knowledge]: “vi” = “vishesh” [particular/special] – particular/special knowledge. The awareness of the Whole of Consciousness/Spirit is “gyana.” The awareness of individual consciousness is “vigyana.” This means: The Knowledge of the Self that happens upon merging with the Self – that is “gyana.” And knowledge of all of the substances/matters such as earth etc. - that is “vigyana.” To make it a little clearer: the Self is all; the awareness that comes from this firm knowing – that is what is called “gyana.” With the support of “gyana,” through extremely precise investigation, the particular and complete understanding that comes about regarding all of the individual elements – that is “vigyana.” Putting it simply: “so'haṃ” [I am That] – this Knowledge is the only “gyana.” Everything else besides that is “vigyana.” “gyana” and “vigyana” are related to each other. When perception looks downward after experiencing the depth of “gyana,” there is “vigyana.” And upon experiencing the depth of “vigyana,” when perception looks upward, becomes steady and stays locked there – then “gyana” is attained.