### Prose 
 --- 
दैवमेवापरे यज्ञं योगिन: पर्युपासते |
ब्रह्माग्नावपरे यज्ञं यज्ञेनैवोपजुह्वति || 25||
daivam evāpare yajñaṁ yoginaḥ paryupāsate
brahmāgnāvapare yajñaṁ yajñenaivopajuhvati

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Amongst the yogis, some perform “daiva-yagya” [yagya to the demi-gods]. And then again, some, through yagya, offer yagya as the offering in the “Brahmagni” [Fire of Brahman]. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
The yagya of offering to Brahman is the greatest of all yagyas. But according to the differences of the rights of different sadhaks, many types of yagyas are performed for the sake of [all types of sadhaks] being able to attain Wisdom. All of those yagyas are stated in slokas 25 to 29 [of this Chapter 4]. How the sadhak, having become a yogi, attains establishment in Brahman by offering the oblation of the delusion of the universe the Fire of Brahman, and what kinds of states he/she has to go through before that happens – that is what has been taught through the descriptions of all of those yagyas. Being a sadhak, one should make a good comparison of all of these [yagyas] against one's own Kriya, and come to know what one's own dutiful work should be. When the sadhak leaves the physicality of the universe and dives into the Sarasvati within [or: in the middle of] the Ganges and Yamuna (Sarasvati is prior to “swara” [prior to “Svaraloka” - field of causality]), because, at that time, the pull of the sadhak's apana is reduced, all of the lotuses up to the Sahasrar become upward-faced. At that time, even after piercing the Muladhar-knot by taking recourse in the interruption-free Brahman-mantra, because of the errors of habit, and thereby, because one is not able to fool the four powers of the four lotus-petals, one ends up interrupting the Brahman-mantra. Thus, one has to appease those four powers. From here, taking up a new seed, even after coming up to the Svadhisthan and entering the vajra [nadi], again, due to being careless and falling into contact with the six great powers, one has to appease them as well. Again, taking up a new seed, even after coming up and entering the chitra [nadi] in the Manipur, one has to appease the ten [powers]. In this way, upon [appeasing] the twelve [powers] at the Anahata, sixteen at the Vishuddha, and the two powers at the Agya, the sadhak takes a slight rest. The energetic, reflection/shadow-free forms of all of these powers are witnessed. Thus, they are “demi-gods.” Even if there is no desire at the time of appeasing them, the sadhak has to “thokkar” [peck] them and go on. This apprehending the demi-gods and leaving them – meaning: “pujan” [worshiping] and “visarjan” [casting them away] – this is indeed that which is called “daiva-yagya” [yagya to the gods]. Later, when Kutastha is seen, the sadhak's “tvaṃ” [you] and Kutastha's “tat” [That] come together. The union of these two is called “yoga.” Those who do this work – they are the ones who are “yogis.” As soon as the sadhak leaves his/her “delusion-'I'” and goes into the “Pure-'I'” of “tat,” immediately, the sadhak attains the realization of his/her True Form. This falling into Oneself by oneself, and by One's Own Whim remaining as “I” - this is that which is called “doing yagya with yagya.” This merging of the sadhak in Brahman and experiencing Brahman-ness in the State of Brahman – at this time, no attribute/adjunct of the sadhak remains. That is why it has been illustrated thusly: “upa” = through “upasarga” [dragging] [oneself], the sadhak's “I” is “upaharan” [offered] into the Fire of Brahman in the Brahman-yagya. 