### Prose 
 --- 
अकीर्तिं चापि भूतानि
कथयिष्यन्ति तेऽव्ययाम् |
सम्भावितस्य चाकीर्ति
र्मरणादतिरिच्यते || 34||
akīrtiṁ chāpi bhūtāni
kathayiṣhyanti te ’vyayām
sambhāvitasya chākīrtir
maraṇād atirichyate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
And more, all of the phenomena will announce your indelible/undying “akeerti” [lack of accomplishment; failure]. For a capable person, “akeerti” is worse than even death.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Dear sadhak! If, after progressing this far in Kriya, you now abandon the Kriya of pranayam etc. (war) because of falling under the power of sorrow, then – the task that you leave unfinished, and [the knowledge] that you were not able to realize the work you started to do – that will be your “akeerti” [lack of accomplishment; failure]. It is not just that this “akeerti” will cause regret in you only in this life; it will become unending and indestructible. This is because: all of the phenomena (the subtle body composed of the non-quintuplicated five primal elements – the seventeen “kalaa” [functionalities] such as mind etc.) will announce that “akeerti” of yours and make it unending – meaning: because of the extreme downfall after having accomplished greatly, they [the phenomena] will make you succumb to the power of the torrent of births and deaths, again and again, and will not allow you to escape the grip of the memory-samskara of that previously performed act [the reluctance to fight in the dharma-war]. Then – like the way suffering samsaris [worldly people] say, “Oh how many sinful acts I must have done! How many cows I must have murdered! How many people I must have murdered! How many women I must have murdered! Now I am suffering the consequences of all of that!” – because of being under the “grace” of intense samsara, all of those kinds of words will come out of your mouth. This is the “announcing [of your failure].” And then, those [regrets] will transform into [further] samskaras and they will be thorns in the way of the spiritual progress you deeply desire. That is why I am saying – dear sadhak! You are “sambhavita” (greatly revered) – meaning: greater than the seventeen “kalaas” such as mind, intellect etc. If you willingly make the choice to take up this “akeerti,” then this will be even worse than death for you. This is because in death, only the samskaras remain after becoming disembodied, the physical sufferings do not remain; they finish with the body. But in this [“akeerti”], one has to suffer twice the amount of suffering in the body/ies.  