### Prose 
 --- 
सञ्जय उवाच |
तं तथा कृपयाविष्टमश्रुपूर्णाकुलेक्षणम् |
विषीदन्तमिदं वाक्यमुवाच मधुसूदन: || 1||
sañjaya uvācha
taṁ tathā kṛipayāviṣhṭamaśhru pūrṇākulekṣhaṇam
viṣhīdantamidaṁ vākyam uvācha madhusūdanaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Sanjaya said: “Madhusudan [Sri Krishna], seeing the despondent Arjuna overcome with compassion and tear-filled eyes, spoke these words to him.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
It is by rising above the visible and limited five elements that one gains complete victory. The inner vision that is revealed after achieving that complete victory is that which is called “Sanjaya” (“saṃ” [“san”] = total + “jay[a]” [victory]). And the direct knowledge that is born from observing with that inner vision, the knowledge against which there cannot even be a cause for doubt – the understanding that is possible through that knowledge – that is what is called the “statements by Sanjaya.”
 
“Vish” means that which has the power of permeation; “a” = addiction; “d” = giving; “giving” addiction to permeations is called “vishad.” Just as there is the permeation of names and forms given by the jiva to the [things of the] Maya-filled universe – in that same way, the meanings of the words relating to Brahman also have a certain kind of permeation. If one “gives” addiction to the permeation of Brahman, one has to end. And if one gives addiction to the permeation of Maya (the universe), one has to fall into suffering. The sadhak, while going forward to merge with the permeation of Brahman, ends up giving addiction to the permeation of Maya because of the errors of habit. And from that, those [vrittis] that come forth from the [permeations of the] meaning of the word “mine” - [the sadhak] takes them up because of [his/her] union with Maya [at that time], and becomes filled with pity. This is what is known as “Vishad Yoga.” Thus, being under the intensity of Maya, the tears come and cover up the power of external vision. As soon as the external vision is covered, immediately does the veil of the inner vision get lifted, and thrilling experiences come forth. Those experiences, verily, are the statements of Madhusudan [Sri Krishna] – meaning: the spontaneous deliberation and resolution of one's own questions by one's own understanding/knowing in one's own self-awareness. “Madhu” [honey] refers to something very sweet. The jiva's desires for enjoyments in samsara are the “sweet things.” The One Who is the “sudan” (eliminator) of that “honey” appearing as desires – meaning: the One Who Liberates the jiva from the samsara-calamity – it is He Who is “Madhusudan” (Kutastha “Tarak Brahman”). Because the treasures of knowledge, detachment and such are always present in Him, He is called “Bhagavan” [the Divine One; the Lord; God].