### Prose 
 --- 
तपाम्यहमहं वर्षं निगृह्णम्युत्सृजामि च |
अमृतं चैव मृत्युश्च सदसच्चाहमर्जुन || 19||
tapāmyaham ahaṁ varṣhaṁ nigṛihṇāmyutsṛijāmi cha
amṛitaṁ chaiva mṛityuśh cha sad asach chāham arjuna

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Arjuna! I am the giver of “tapa” [heat; see commentary below for spiritual explanation]. I am the One Who brings about rain, and again I draw it up [as well]. I am “amrita” [immortality; nectar; ambrosia]. I am “mrityu” [death]. I am “Sat” [goodness; existence]. I am “asat” [wrongness; non-existence].

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Tapah” = of heat/pressure. The celestial first words to the creator Brahmaa is “tapa.” When, through special Kriya, the sadhak reaches “naad” [sound] – at that time the sadhak sees light. That light has such a mighty spiritual power that mind casts off grasping and rejecting and goes into that light. Because the light envelops the mind, the mind ends. Because of there being no mind, the body, speech etc. – all of these are “forgotten.” Thus, the matters of the world having disappeared, the covering that is the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] is removed. And no other knowing, or unknowing, besides “I AM ‘I’” stays. This is the settledness in samadhi, the paravastha of Kriya or the end of inhalation. This is verily “the drawing up by heat” – like the drawing up of the water from sea by the rays of the sun.
 
Varsha [rain] – “vikarshan” or pouring forth. In this state of samadhi where the chitta [personal consciousness] is merged, the seed of samsara remains within it. This is because: until the last exhalation is made from the body, this condition remains. That is why [from this aforementioned state] one has to again return to the state of samsara [after samadhi]. That coming back is called “vikarshan” [re-pouring] or “varshan” [raining; returning to Earth]. This is the samsara-facing or destined exhalation of Prakriti.
 
Nigraha [non-holding] – “Nih” = “naasti” [non-existence; annihilation]; “graha” = “grahan” [holding] – meaning: where there is no grasping/holding. And there is no casting off either. This state that is devoid of grasping and rejecting – that is called “nigraha” – meaning: “pralaya” [dissolution]. The merging back of Prakriti [into the Self] is that which is called “pralaya.” And “utsrijan” [emergence; giving birth] is creation. The emergence of Prakriti Herself is that which is called “creation.”  Both of these are happening from “I”. When Prakriti gathers up the net of samsara and rests in “I” – it is then that there is immortality and the state of “Sat” [Reality]. And again, when She slips from “I” and spreads out the net of creation – it is at that time that there is the state of death or the state of “asat” [non-reality]. “Asat” means that which has no knowingness [or: actual presence] in the three phases of time – meaning: just delusion. Dear sadhak! Take a look. In all of these [terms mentioned throughout this and previous slokas], there is only One “I AM ‘I’ Itself” that exists. The rest is just playing word-games. When you grab hold of “I” – that is called “nigraha” [non-grasping; this is because “I” is devoid of grasping or casting off]. If you do not go downwards, then your “you-ness” goes away. Become “I”! And if you go downwards, then right away there is your “utsrijan” [giving birth] – meaning: up above, you were “I”; coming down, you again made that “I” into creation. Then [after creation], that “I” up above became “you” to you, and the “I” below which is actually “you” – that became your “I”. Therefore, in every direction, only “I AM ‘I’ Itself” exists.