### Prose 
 --- 
नादत्ते कस्यचित्पापं न चैव सुकृतं विभु: |
अज्ञानेनावृतं ज्ञानं तेन मुह्यन्ति जन्तव: || 15||
nādatte kasyachit pāpaṁ na chaiva sukṛitaṁ vibhuḥ
ajñānenāvṛitaṁ jñānaṁ tena muhyanti jantavaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
“Vibhu” [the all-pervading] does not take the sin of anyone, and does not take the virtue of anyone either. “gyana” is covered by “agyana.” It is for that reason that all living beings are in delusion.

### Commentary 
 --- 
After the state of “prabhu,” the sadhak becomes “vibhu” [all-pervading] – meaning: having become universe-pervading, one becomes endowed with the totality of Consciousness. This is verily the “state beyond all gunas” - the State of Shiva. This is indeed the “all phenomena/beings being within one's Self” stated in the 7th sloka [of this Chapter 5]. This is still a “state.” That is because: although at this time the Consciousness-Truth has gone beyond the chitta or the Mahattattva, because one is still in the place where Avyakta and chitta are, a little bit of contact with error remains. At this time, sin and virtue – meaning: pravritti and nivritti [respectively] – all run out. There is nothing to take [or: take up]. This is because: as Consciousness leaves the Maya-enjoying state to the state of being beyond Maya, all Mayic and Prakritic activities dissolve. This “vibhu” state also dissolves very quickly. Then all states end. That is a state with no state. It is up to this point of the “vibhu” state that Knowledge remains. It cannot go beyond this. With all states being extinguished, Knowledge is also extinguished. When that “agyana” [Not-Knowledge] state comes about, the “janmavah” - meaning: all of the functionalities of the sense organs under the powers of creation, preservation and destruction become “deluded” - meaning: they become inactive, and cease into inertness. — Begin Footnote. — This “agyana” [non-Knowledge] state that happens – in this, all of these vrittis [functionalities] become inactive and inert, [but] they do not dissolve. This is because the body remains. Unless the body is cast off, there is no dissolution of the universe – meaning: all of the vrittis. This state of “agyana” for sure happens as the final stage of sadhana, [but] it [also] happens to all jivas at death. Just as: when asampragyata samadhi breaks and the sadhak comes down to the worldly experience and thereby all of the vrittis become active – in the same way, after death, when the jiva takes on a new body, all of the vrittis of the previous life manifest one after another. The difference between the “agyana” [ignorance] of death and the “agyana” [Not-Knowledge] of samadhi is this: the body is left behind at death; during samadhi, the body does not die. At death, the jiva remains under the control of Prakriti. In samadhi, one becomes free. At death, the non-sadhak and the fallen yogi-sadhak rely on “knowingness.” In samadhi, there is no reliance on anything. One becomes free of reliance and attains Nirvana-Emancipation.  — End Footnote. —