### Prose 
 --- 
न मां कर्माणि लिम्पन्ति न मे कर्मफले स्पृहा |
इति मां योऽभिजानाति कर्मभिर्न स बध्यते || 14||
na māṁ karmāṇi limpanti na me karma-phale spṛihā
iti māṁ yo ’bhijānāti karmabhir na sa badhyate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Karmas cannot bind me. I have no desires for the fruits of karmas. One who knows Me in this way, that one is not bound by the karmas.

### Commentary 
 --- 
One who has, through Kriyayoga, made one's mind devoid of the worldly experience and has gone above the five elements and has seen one's own True Form, that one has understood quite well what it is to be free of karma and to be devoid of the desires for the fruits of karmas [actions]. Because the sadhak, having known one's own State of the Self through the performance of yoga, is eternally abiding in the Eternal Truth-Substance, no matter what kind of state he/she is in at the time of the leaving of the body [death], that time is one's “agni jyotir ahah shuklah”; the time of “uttarayan” comes forth, — Begin Footnote. — Translators' note: The Sanskrit phrase beginning with the word “agni” as well as the word “uttarayan” are extracts from sloka 24 of Chapter 8 of the Gita. These are not translated – in this particular occurrence – to Bengali in the original. Instead of the English translators giving a translation of the Sanskrit in brackets, as has been usually done, the translators have chosen to advise the reader to see the commentary in the Pranab Gita on 8:24. This decision is made for the following reason: the aforementioned sanskrit phrase, as well as the word “uttarayan” are explained in the Pranab Gita from the yogic perspective, and said explanation is not like most other translations of the Bhagavad Gita. As well, it is not possible to make a concise translation of the aforementioned extract and the word “uttarayan” if one wants to stay true to the commentary to sloka 8:24 in the Pranab Gita. Therefore, the translators have chosen to refer the reader to the commentary of that sloka – 8:24 – in the Pranab Gita. As well, in sloka 8:24, there is an internal reference to sloka 8:18 for the definition of the word “ahah” [see extract above], which again, is not treated by the Pranab Gita as it usually is in most translations. — End Footnote. — and therefore, one attains the way of no return [no reincarnation]. And one never again has to fall into being bound by the ties of karma [actions and their fruits] through the taking on of a body.