### Prose 
 --- 
पाञ्चजन्यं हृषीकेशो देवदत्तं धनञ्जय: |
पौण्ड्रं दध्मौ महाशङ्खं भीमकर्मा वृकोदर: || 15||
pāñchajanyaṁ hṛiṣhīkeśho devadattaṁ dhanañjayaḥ
pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śhaṅkhaṁ bhīma-karmā vṛikodaraḥ

अनन्तविजयं राजा कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिर: |
नकुल: सहदेवश्च सुघोषमणिपुष्पकौ || 16||
anantavijayaṁ rājā kuntī-putro yudhiṣhṭhiraḥ
nakulaḥ sahadevaśhcha sughoṣha-maṇipuṣhpakau

काश्यश्च परमेष्वास: शिखण्डी च महारथ: |
धृष्टद्युम्नो विराटश्च सात्यकिश्चापराजित: || 17||
kāśhyaśhcha parameṣhvāsaḥ śhikhaṇḍī cha mahā-rathaḥ
dhṛiṣhṭadyumno virāṭaśhcha sātyakiśh chāparājitaḥ

द्रुपदो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्वश: पृथिवीपते |
सौभद्रश्च महाबाहु: शङ्खान्दध्मु: पृथक् पृथक् || 18||
drupado draupadeyāśhcha sarvaśhaḥ pṛithivī-pate
saubhadraśhcha mahā-bāhuḥ śhaṅkhāndadhmuḥ pṛithak pṛithak

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
“Hrishikesh” [Sri Krishna] [sounded] the “Panchajanya” conch-shell; “Dhananjaya” [Arjuna] [sounded] the “Devadatta” conch-shell; “Bheemakarma Vrikodara” [Bhima] [sounded] the conch-shell named “Paundra”; king Yudhishthira – the son of Kunti – [sounded] the “Anantavijaya” conch-shell; Nakula [sounded] the “Sughosha” conch-shell, and Sahadeva sounded the conch-shell named “Manipushpaka.” The great archer Kashiraj, the great warriors Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Virat, the undefeatable Satyaki, Drupada, the sons of Draupadi and the mighty ones such as Subhadra all sounded their own separate conch-shells.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Hṛsheekeshah”:  “hṛsheekA” = the aggregate of the senses; “eesha” = controller/director; the One Who is the controller/director of the senses. The One by Whose Power the senses do their own particular works – it is He Who is Hrishikesh (Sri Krishna) – Kutastha Chaitanya. His abode is the Ajna-chakra. From the five chakras such as Muladhar etc., five sounds arise, and they are experienced as mixed together and coming from within the Ajna-chakra. This is why Sri Krishna's conch-shell is called “Panchajanya” [from five sources].
 
“Dhananjaya”: “dhana” = experiential manifestations (birth, death, pleasure, pain, hunger, thirst [etc.]); “jaya” = being victorious. The one who is victorious over the experiential manifestations is “Dhananjaya.” It is by the element of fire/energy that the kinetic power becomes evident; air also moves due to fire/energy; thus, whatever powers there are [in phenomena], they happen due to fire/energy. This is why the name of the fire-element is called “Dhananjaya.” His abode is at the Manipur-chakra. At that place, he [also] takes the name of “Vaishvanara” [universal person] and bestows the jiva its life-sustaining power (the nectar in the form the digestive juices). This Vaishvanara is the actual face of all of the gods [alternate translation: This Vaishvanara is the primary form of all of the gods.]. This is why, during sadhana, the sound that is similar to the veena [Indian lute] that rises from that Manipur – it is named “Devadatta” conch-shell resonance [resonance “from the gods”], the vritti of experiencing, or “Sananda Samprajnata Samadhi.”

“Vṛkodara” - (“vṛka” = fire; “udara” = belly; because there is a fire named “vrika” in the belly, Bhima's name is “Vrikodara”) - the air-element. Fire comes from air and again dissolves into air. Therefore it can be said that fire exists within air [within its “belly”]. For this reason, the air element is called “Vrikodara.” The location of [the] air-element is the Anahata-chakra situated in the heart-center. During sadhana, a sound like long-sustaining bells rises from here. Its name is “Paundra” conch-shell resonance, the “ahamkar [ego] vritti” or the “Sasmita Samprajnata Samadhi” state.
 
“MahAshankha” - “nṛlalATAsthikhandena rachitA japamAlikA; mahAshankhamayee jneyA mahAvidyA susiddhidA” - (Neelatantra) – meaning: above the Ajna-chakra, in the “dashangula” [ten-finger-length] place (right after the skeletal-section of the forehead, within the head [but] outside the brain-matter), there is a skeletal-section with 51 small openings/holes. It is that which is called “Mahashankha” [great conch-shell]. The central opening in this [skeletal-section] is called “Sumeru.” All of the places in the body are “ahata” [struck]; only that ten-finger-length area is “anahata” [unstruck]. During sadhana, when vital air pierces through that Sumeru and goes to the Sahasrar – it is then that the sound like long-sustaining bells - [which is] not fluttering/fluctuating – the resonance of the Mahashankha – is heard. That is the conch-shell sound of Bhima.
 
“YudhiShThira” - (one who cannot be moved in war) = the space-element. Space is always still. Regardless of the strong forces of earth, water, fire and air, there is no movement in space. This is why the space-element is called “Yudhishthira.” Its location is in the Vishuddha-chakra in the throat. During sadhana, a sound like thunder rises from here. That is what is called “Anantavijaya” [eternally victorious] conch-shell resonance, because no other sound can overtake this sound. When mind is merged into this sound, the state devoid of all vrittis - “Asamprajnata Samadhi”  - comes about.
 
“Nakula” = the “rasa” [liquid/water/taste] element. With all of the kinds of “rasas” [tastes/enjoyments represented by the “water-element”] that there are – one cannot finish them through partaking – meaning: one cannot find the shore (the boundary) of the water-element [no end to partaking in worldly enjoyments]. For this reason the water-element is named “Nakula.” It is located in the Svadhisthan-chakra at the root of the sex organ. From here, a sound similar to a flute rises forth. It is called “Sughosha” conch-shell resonance, the vritti of certainty, or the state of “Savichara Samprajnata Samadhi.”
 
“Sahadeva” - the earth-element (“Saha” = that which is “with”; “deva” = one who sports). The sport of the jiva is with the Earth – meaning: [the aspects that are] within the five elements – sound, touch, sight, taste, smell – it is with these guna-connected primal particles of the Earth that the jiva has a close relationship. It is for this very reason that the earth-element is called “Sahadeva” [that which is company to the deva]. It is verily because of this close relationship that the vanity of the body (physical) is strong. The Muladhar-chakra is the location of this earth-element. From here, a sound similar to the mad buzzing of bees rises forth. It is that which is called “Manipushpaka” conch-shell resonance, the vritti of doubt, or the state of “Savitarka Samprajnata Samadhi.”
 
The meanings of “Kashiraj,” “Dhrishtadyumna” etc. are stated in slokas 3-6 [of Chapter 1].
 
“Shikhandee” = delusion. The hankering for fulfilling desires or enjoying worldly pleasures after the taking up of yoga. When this hankering grows, the life-force “chimes up.” That is the conch-shell sound of Shikhandi.
 
In his previous life, Shikhandi was “Amba,” the daughter of Kashiraj. More about that and the spiritual mystery behind it are presented below.
 
Kashiraj had three daughters: 1) Amba (the vritti of delusion), 2) Ambika (the vritti of doubt) and 3) Ambalika (the vritti of certainty). During the formal occasion in which they were choosing their husbands, Bhishma forcefully abducted all three sisters right from the very gathering of this occasion, and betrothed both Ambika and Ambalika to his own brother Vichitravirya. Because Amba had already chosen Shalvaraj as her husband, Bhishma sent her to Shalvaraj. But because of the abduction of Amba by Bhishma, Shalva decided to not have Amba [as his wife]. Amba took refuge with Parashurama, who was Bhishma's guru. Even with all of Parashurama's efforts [at reasoning with Bhishma], he was not able to bring Bhishma to think in his way [to take Amba as his wife] . Then Amba, in order to kill Bhishma, prayed to Lord Shiva, and with Shiva's boon left her body and became reborn as the neuter daughter of the king Drupada; and later, through the magical favor of a “yaksha” [nature-spirit], became male. He-she then learned the military-arts and became a powerful warrior. Bhishma-deva, the great hero, the one who is victorious over the senses, was aware of all of these endeavors of Amba. However, [Bhishma's] death was under Bhishma's own power. Unless he wished it, there was no way that death would come to him. His father had given him this boon.
 
In order to kill Bhishma, Shikhandi took the side of the Pandavas during the war of Kurukshetra. On the tenth day of the war, Arjuna, at the advice of Bhishma himself [hinted previously to the Pandavas], fought Bhishma while keeping Shikhandi in front of him [between Arjuna and Bhishma]. Upon seeing the female-neuter Shikhandi, Bhishma put down his weapons. Then he was shot, arrow after arrow, by Arjuna and lay down [supported above the ground by the arrows] on his “deathbed.”

— Begin Translator’s Note — According to the Mahabharata, Bhishma had vowed that he would never fight a woman. Thus, Arjuna using Shikhandi as a shield was the only way to kill Bhishma — End Translator’s Note —

When the shadow of delusion comes about, power is covered up. Because of that the “abhas” (reflection) becomes powerless. That is why with the appearance of delusion in the form of Shikhandi, the reflected consciousness in the form of Bhishma became powerless, and later Shikhandi, because of the fruits of his-her own karma, was killed by Ashvatthama.
 
Indeed, the instruction regarding the practice of Kriya is that it must be performed while looking at Kutastha. It is only by becoming established in the Ajna-chakra that one can be an adept at Knowledge and the functions of Knowledge. This is because the five elements are here in subtle form, and all of the matters of the five elements to be known can be known here. Then again, because the Niranjan Purush [Perfect Person] Who is beyond the elements is also knowable in that same place, [when] associating with That [or: that place] - “prajnAnam brahma” [Consciousness is Brahman], “tat tvam asi” [thou art that], “aham brahmasmi” [I am Brahman], “ayamatmA brahma] – the meaning of these four “Mahavakyas” [iconic great statements] become directly realized; and later, upon being established in Brahman, one becomes a “jivanmukta” [Liberated while alive in the body] and the knowledge “sarvam khalu idaṃ brahma” [indeed, all that is, is Brahman] can be known. During Kriya, while doing continuous Kriya, when the mind becomes settled at Kutastha, a “vayu” [vital air] from below goes up in a whirring way with intense force, and with that happening, a sound also rises forth. That sound is called “naad.” But because of mind becoming still due to attention on the Kutastha, the collision/strike of that vital air (the resonance of the sound) is really experienced first at the Ajna-chakra. Listening to that “naad” with a settled mind, one comes to know that there are several tones united in one rhythm and sounding out like the sound of a self-playing musical instrument. That is what is called the “Panchajanya” conch-shell sound of Hrishikesh [Sri Krishna]. Then through “manas-Kriya” (according to guru's instructions), one has to try to enter into that sound. Right upon making that attempt, because of the collected power of that vital air, there is the appearance of the fire-element situated in the Manipur, and from the middle of that resonance, a powerful light blossoms forth (“dhvanirantargataṃ jyotih” [the light within the sound]), and along with that happening, the sound immediately changes. Then, a sound exactly like a self-sounding veena [Indian lute] begins to resound. That is verily the “Devadatta” conch-shell sound of Arjuna. Immediately upon when one ventures with the mind to enter into that veena-sound, because of the collision/strike of that upward moving vital air, the manifestation of the air-element can be seen. And with that, the sound changes, and a sound similar to long-sustaining bells begins to sound forth. That is verily the resonance by the name of “Paundra” from the “Mahashankha” [great conch-shell] of Bhima. When one puts one's mind in that sound, an intense electric power rises up and takes the mind up to the Vishuddha and pervades it into space. On the outside as well, the body goes through a thrill-rush, and a sound like thunder can be heard. That is verily Yudhishthira's “Anantavijaya” conch-shell resonance. Right as it reaches the Vishuddha, that vital air completely loses its power. Not having the support of the five elements, it cannot rise farther up. Thus, it gradually spreads in the downward direction. As soon as it takes up the downward movement, it goes directly down to, and collides/ strikes (without running into any blocks) at, the Svadhisthan. Right away, a very sweet flute-like sound begins to come forth. That is verily the sounding out of Nakula's “Sughosha” conch-shell. At that time, a boundless bliss-nectar manifests, due to which the mind becomes intoxicated. But that vital air's force, becoming progressively stronger in the downward motion, just touches the Svadhisthan and falls down into the Muladhar. Its force also becomes progressively steadied, and a sound, just like the mad buzzing of bees, rises up. That is what is called Sahadeva's “Manipushpaka” conch-shell resonance. This sound makes the sadhak's mind ecstatic. As is the ecstasy, so is the coming of restlessness. Taking refuge in that restlessness, [the sadhak's mind] exits to the outside. At that time, the sadhak hears a bunch of separate [not the same] sounds, passing like the blinks of the eyes, one after another. The matter of those sounds is mentioned in slokas 17 and 18 [of Chapter 1]. But because of the mind's restlessness, those [sounds] stay only for moments and are not clear, and [thus] are not perceived very well.
 
During Kriya, if the sadhak, who is overwhelmed by the pressures of pravritti and nivritti, looks at Kutastha, gradually he sees many types of colorful forms and hears many types of light and heavy sounds. These are the things that are spoken about in these slokas.