### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
अक्षरं ब्रह्म परमं स्वभावोऽध्यात्ममुच्यते |
भूतभावोद्भवकरो विसर्ग: कर्मसञ्ज्ञित: || 3||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
akṣharaṁ brahma paramaṁ svabhāvo ’dhyātmam uchyate
bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo visargaḥ karma-sanjñitaḥ

अधिभूतं क्षरो भाव: पुरुषश्चाधिदैवतम् |
अधियज्ञोऽहमेवात्र देहे देहभृतां वर || 4||
adhibhūtaṁ kṣharo bhāvaḥ puruṣhaśh chādhidaivatam
adhiyajño ’ham evātra dehe deha-bhṛitāṁ vara

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The Lord said: “The Indestructible that is Beyond – that is ‘Brahman.’ The State of the Self is that which is called ‘Adhyatma.’ The acting forth that brings about the appearance of the phenomenal – that is what is called ‘Karma.’ O greatest of the embodied ones [Arjuna]! That which is destructible – that is called ‘Adhibhuta.’ The ‘Purush’ [Being] is indeed ‘Adhidaiva.’ And in this body, I Myself am ‘Adhiyajna.’”

### Commentary 
 --- 
(1) “Aksharaṃ paramaṃ brahma” – the One Who has no end, Who has no change, the One in Whom Eternity is – that One is “Brahman.”
 
“Akshara” - One Who has no end. “Kutasth’okshara uchyate” [Kutastha is called “Akshara”]. The One Who, even though He is One, takes on many forms when He is in the “Kuta.” See Chapter 4, sloka 5 [of the Pranab Gita] for the definition and explanation of “Kuta.” Another meaning of the word “kuta” is the goldsmith’s anvil, on which the gold is cut and shaped. Just as on that “kuta” [shaping anvil] the same gold takes on many forms that are given many names, and then when the gold is melted, all the names and forms disappear and gold just remains gold – in the same way, the One Powerful Consciousness reflects on the “Kuta” (on the canvas of Prakriti) and takes on many forms. Just as – when the morning dew shows itself in many colors on the grain stalks, yet the dew is the same color everywhere, and the phenomena is happening due to the play of the sunlight and the grain stalks – in the same way, through the creative and active power of the Power of Prakriti, the One Consciousness has become dressed up as the Cosmos. This is that which is called “Kutastha.” In the external world, the goldsmith throws down the gold and forms it in the outer world. There is a similar place within (that place that is called “Kuta”). The place where it is like this: I am looking with one-pointedness; there is no blinking; and at the same time I am seeing that the same Thing, from the same place, is taking on so many forms that I am not able to comprehend how it is happening and from where, and who is doing it. That “Kuta” and “Kutastha” - that is what is called “Tat” [“That”]. How is this “Tat”? Like this: “tat viShNoh paramaṃ padaṃ sadA pashyanti soorayah diveeva chakshurAtatam” [the Supreme State of the Supreme Being is seen at all times by the wise through the divine eye; there are many diverse translations of this statement]. One can see this “Tadbrahman” [“That” Brahman] by becoming like a blind man [closing one’s physical eyes]. Those who see it – they see an expansive (open) eye-like form in Space. Just as the outside of the eye is white and the middle is dark, the “Tat” is also like that. One sees an indescribable Light, unlike the light of the moon, sun and fire, a surrounding Light. And in the middle, there is a lightning-filled deep violet-shaded black spherical form. That is that which is called Vishnu’s “Param Pada” [the Supreme State/Abode of Vishnu; or: the Lotus Feet of Vishnu]. Here is a further description of this “Param Pada”: “kodaNDadvayamadhyasthaṃ pasyanti jnAnachakshuShA; kadambagolAkAraṃ brahmalokaṃ brahmanti te” – meaning: like the form made by two strung bows placed “face to face” with each other (like the shape of an egg) – right in the middle of that is a sphere like a “kadam” flower [burl-flower; spherical flower]. Those who see this sphere through their Eye of Consciousness – they go to the Abode of Brahman. This is why it is called the “Supreme State/Abode of Vishnu.” That “kadam” form that is seen within the “egg-shape” – both are Limitless and One. Just like the sky above looks like a sphere with boundaries to the upward looking eyes, yet if the eyes are shifted a bit the sky can be seen as borderless and expansive – in the same way, “It” is also Boundless, without limits and Expansive. That is why it is called “Tadbrahman.”
 
(2) “SvabhAva” – the word “sva” means “one’s own”; what the word “bhava” means – that cannot really be expressed in words. But if it is to be spoken about – the ones who do speak about it speak about it in the following way. The living beings of the world are female and male. There cannot be “bhava” [ecstatic, reposeful state] between woman and woman or man and man. The reason is: as long as there is the lack of completion, for that long will the peaceful state not appear. When the woman finds the man, and the man finds the woman, and they both dispel each other’s longing, when they both unite and become one – this anxiety-free state of repose – or the natural state of being – this is that which is called “bhava.” The state in which even the attachment to the words of guru, born of unmoving faith, is dissolved – this kind of still state is called the “bhava-state.”
 
The intellect that for all this time had been a slave to the mind, affirming the certain-ness of sound, [touch,] sight, taste and smell, again and again, presenting those experiences in different enchanting forms to the mind – today, that same intellect itself has left behind the externally facing vrittis [functionalities] and taken refuge in the Life of its own life – the “I”. And so, another name for “Svabhava” is “Adhyatma” [Self-knowing]. “Adhi” = primary; that which has primacy – that is primary. That which ascertains firmly the good and bad of this existence – that is primary. “The world is impermanent; the Reality of the Self is Eternal.” [This kind of intellect] affirms this with certainty. The words “adhi” – meaning: absolutely certain intellect, and “atma [short ‘a’ at the end]” – meaning: “I” [are used] – the meaning of the words together: “Adhyatma” is the intellect’s sight being in the direction of the Self. My intellect becoming “I” is called “Adhyatma.”
 
(3) “BhutabhAvodbhavakaro visargah karmasaṃjnitah” – for the three states of time – “bhuta” [past], “bhavishyat” [future] and “vartaman” [present] – the past is very material [another meaning of the word “bhuta” is “material” phenomena/living being]; the present is very subtle; and the future is unknown. But these three states actually show the limitedness of time. That which has not yet been born – in what form, how and where that is – I know nothing about it; there is no way even of knowing that. But as soon as it is born, right then it is “present.” And then after its birth, the aspects of time and destination come into being, and just like that those things that are born fall into the chasm of the past and go on to become “bhuta” [past; or: phenomenon/that which has been born and will die]. That is why we were saying that the state of time that is unknown, that itself is “the future.” The extremely subtle or “appearing” state of time – that is “the present.” And the state of time that is extremely material – that is “bhuta” [the past; or: phenomena]. The action-consuming time’s finished state, “done” state or “ended” state – this state is called “bhuta” [past; phenomenal] – meaning: that which is born; that which remains for a while after being born; and, because of the grace of “ending,” then returns to the unknown state in which it used to be. This “bhuta” [the existence in time] has taken on five forms due to the conditions of sattva, rajas and tamas [gunas/primal qualities]. These [forms] are called: space, air, fire, water and earth. Now, each of these also have gunas [qualities] of their own. The guna in the sky-element is sound. In the air-element, sound and touch are the gunas. In fire, sound, touch and sight/visible-form are the gunas. In water, sound, touch, sight/visible-form and taste/liquidity are the gunas. In the earth-element, sound, touch, sight/visible-form, taste/liquidity and scent are the gunas. Everything that you can see in this visible world, all of this is within this “bhuta.” When none of these have been born at all – it is then that the Unending/Unlimited, Indivisible Brahman can be mentioned. When “separateness” begins to happen from that “All-Unity” – it is then that two bindus [mystical Points] form – one is Unlimited/Endless and the other is limited/with end. The appearance of the One Brahman’s two bindus – representing “Sat” [Truth/Reality] and “asat” [untruth/unreality] is that which is called “visarga” (“vi” = “vishesh” [particular; special] + “sarga” [physicality] = “srishti” [creation]). It is via this “visarga” [the twin points] that the limited/with end aspects begin to go forth from the Unlimited/Endless. This beginning state alone is “bhutabhava” [state of phenomena in time]. And the expansion of this is called “udbhava” [arising; appearing]. This “udbhava” [does two things:] expands creation in the direction of samsara, and dissolves creation in the direction of Brahman – meaning: facing the direction of samsara, the many-ness/multiplicity comes into being, and in the direction of Brahman, those two bindus merge and become One. This creation and dissolution causing “visarga” is that which is “Karma.” — Begin Footnote. — The explanation of “karma” is explained in the Introduction [to the Pranab Gita] and in the commentary in Chapter 4, sloka 17. See. — End Footnote. —

(4) “Adhibhoota” – when the previously mentioned state of existence that is divided into the three sections of time – that earthly, destructible or perishable state that is endowed with the six permutations [see footnote 5 below] – — Begin Footnote. — “Asti jyayate vardhate vipariNamate apaksheeyate vinashyateeti ShaTavikArAh” [existence, birth, growth, change, decay and death comprise the six permutations]. — End Footnote. — leaves the Self and begins to spread, playing with these things – that is the state called “Adhibhuta.” “Jaar dhon, taar dhon noy; nepoy maare doi” [Bengali saying: those to whom the wealth truly belongs do not get that wealth; the cheats get the reward].
 
(5) “PuruSha” – The one who is laying in “pura” – that is the one who is called “Purush.” “Pura” means room/house. The area that is made by surrounding available space with walls all around – that is called “pura.” The One Who, in the Form of Consciousness, is residing within this “pura” in the form of the body – that is the One Who is “Purush” - meaning: the “chicchaya” [reflection of Consciousness] or the expanse of Consciousness that reflects on the canvas of the chitta [personal awareness] – that is the One Who is Purush. It is He Who is laying in the “pura” of the chitta (being present there).
 
When the intellect leaves behind the externally-directed vrittis [functionalities] and plays with this Purush, talks with It, understands It, or catches It – that is the state called “Adhidaiva.” “Adhi” means “[absolutely certain] intellect”; this has been previously stated. Now we are speaking about “daiva.” “Da” + “eva” = “daiva. The sound “da” represents the place of residing – meaning: yoni; the sound “eva” means “this.” When the intellect says, “My place of residing is this,” and thus tries to merge with God Himself or actually does merge – that state is called “Adhidaiva.” In the path of pravritti [external outlook], it is this very Purush that is reflecting in every substance of Prakriti, and, in different forms, presiding as the lords of those substances. That is why It is known as “Adhidaiva.”
 
(6) “Adhiyajna” – “adhi” = intellect; “yajna” = taking and releasing. This nectar-filled [life-giving] air that is flowing in the external space – when this air enters the body, it burns in the heat of the body and becomes poison/toxic. As soon as it becomes toxic, immediately an outwardly directed movement begins. And eventually, that poison actually does go out of the body. This attraction of the nectar and the repulsion of the poison – this is going on automatically. At the bottom of the nasal passage there is an apparatus that is like a husking flap [epiglottis], and there are two passages there. One passage is for air and the other is for food. Whatever edible, drinkable and other such food substances that are put into the body through the mouth – that “husking flap” [epiglottis] closes the air-passage and lets the food/drink substances pour through the food/drink-passage. And when only exhalation and inhalation are flowing in and out, then that “husking flap” closes the passage for water and food and lets the air flow through the passage for air. [The vital essence] of this air goes straight down to the mouth of the sushmna – which connects to the spinal column at the bottom of the spinal column, enters the sushumna, pierces the Muladhar, goes into the vajra [nadi] and pierces the Svadhisthan; then it enters the chitra [nadi] and through it pierces the Manipur; eventually it pierces the Anahata, Vishuddha and Ajna, and upon reaching the Fundamental Triangle at the Sahasrar, returns exactly by that same path and finds repose in the external space. This movement of the vital-air – taking and releasing – when the intellect controls and offers this drawing and releasing according to injunctions (through the Kriya taught by guru) – that state is called “Adhiyajna.” In this body, the “Aham” [“I”] is verily this “Adhiyajna” [the Knower of the Fire Sacrifice].
 
The word “aham” means “the Self.” And “atra” [this] – (“ahambrahmaNe sthulashareerAya, jagradavasthAya, rajogunAya, sangkalpa-vikalpAtmak-manodharmaroopa-sṛShTikriyAya” [from “I Am Brahman” is the manifestation of the physically oriented, waking-state-oriented, rajas-guna-directed, volition and non-volition endowed, and mentally oriented activities of creation]) – meaning: the sound “a” [short vowel] represents Brahmaa, the creator aspect [of the Godhead]. If none of these – physical body, waking state, rajoguna, and mind endowed with volition and non-volition – are there, one cannot be “Brahmaa” [creator aspect]. That is why these are present. And “tra”: “tṛ” = “tarane” [at repose] – meaning: the place where those states find “trana” or rest. (The well-practiced adept sadhak of guru-instructed Kriya knows this state and knows the place as well.) Therefore, O “Dehabhritamvara” [Arjuna; the sadhak] – the greatest of the embodied ones! Whatever you have asked me about, all of these are within this [your] very body. Take a look and see. Direct experience needs no proof.
— SECOND COMMENTARY START — 
There is a second commentary to slokas 8:3-4 in the edition of Pranab Gita used for this English translation. It is in a more formal language than the first commentary to those same slokas [see above].

Notable point. The [Bhagavad] Gita is a scripture that addresses both nivritti [inward movement] and pravritti [outward movement]. This is because there are two paths in life – the path of pravritti and the path of nivritti. The outward flow of breath is called exhalation or “pravritti,” and the inward flow of breath is inhalation or “nivritti.” Via pravritti, there is communion with the elemental aspects of creation, or communion with the worldly experience. That itself is “bhoga” [enjoyment/partaking]. And via nivritti, there is communion with Brahman. That is “yoga” [union].
 
Srimad Shankaracharya [a saint] has said [that]: if the rites of the path of pravritti are performed without desire and with mind surrendered to God, they bring forth the fruits of the path of nivritti. Those are the types of “karmas” [acts] that have been spoken about in the Gita as the “yajnartha karma” [acts worthy of the fire sacrifice] or “karmayoga.” That is why, when commenting on the Gita, the meanings of [the words in accordance with] both paths [nivritti and pravritti] have to be stated. In the previously presented commentaries to slokas 8:3-4 [see the commentary to 8:3-4 immediately before this “second” commentary], explicit attention has been given towards the meaning according to the path of nivritti. For this reason and in order to show both sides [of pravritti and nivritti] in the commentary [to these slokas], a special additional commentary is being given here to three particular subject matters: “Brahman,” “Adhyatma” and “Karma.”
 
(A) BRAHMAN
 
The Great Almighty Spirit or Consciousness – without limits, Infinite and without a second – is called Brahman. This Brahman is the real Eternal Substance. Besides It, everything else is impermanent. Therefore, Brahman is “Param Akshara” [Supreme without end] – meaning: the Eternal Truth.
 
In Its Essential Form, “Brahman” is “Nirguna-Chaitanya” [Consciousness/Spirit without attributes] or “Nirguna” [the Attribute-less]. “Sat” [Existence] - “Chit” [Consciousness] - “Ananda” [Bliss] – these three together are called “Nirguna.” Thus, the Essential Brahman is the Sat-Chit-Ananda-filled, Inexpressible, Primary Consciousness-Being or the Essential Consciousness. And Brahman as Shakti [Active Primal Intelligence-Power] is “Saguna-Chaitanya” [Consciousness/Spirit with attributes] or “Saguna-Chit” [Consciousness with attributes]. “Sattva” [pureness], “rajah” [active-ness; written with varied spellings according to context], “tamah” [inertia-ness; also written with various spellings] – these are the three gunas. Thus, the Brahman-Shakti is the sattva-rajah-tamo-filled Inexpressible Feminine-Consciousness/Spirit, the Consciousness-Prakriti [Primal Nature] or Maya. It is this Maya that is called “iccha-shakti” [Desire-Power]. It is now seen that Brahman is both Nirguna and Saguna. The Nirguna-Brahman-Essence is “Karan-Brahman” [Causal-Brahman] or the Seed of the Cosmos, and Saguna-Brahman is “Karya-Brahman” [Brahman in Manifested Action] or the [manifested and active] Cosmos.
 
Gunas [attributes; active qualities] sprout in Nirguna [the Attribute-less] Itself and in Nirguna Itself do they dissolve/resolve. The activities of creation, preservation and destruction of “Karya” [Active Creation] goes on endlessly on top of “Karan” [Cause]. Thus, “Karan” is Eternal Truth, and “Karya” is temporal and impermanent truth. That temporal and impermanent truth is called “mithya” [the false] or Maya.
 
That Nirguna-Saguna Brahman’s Essence has three “bhavas” or states and three names. Those are: “Ritam,” “Satyam” and “Param.” And Shakti also has three “bhavas” or states and three names. They are: “Avidya,” “Vidya” and “Parama.” That is why it has been written in the scriptures: “ṛtaṃ satyah paraṃ brahma” – meaning: Brahman is known as Ritam, Satyam and Param – these three states and three names. And in Sri Chandi [the main Shakti scripture] it is written: “sA vidyA paramA” - meaning: that Brahman-Shakti Mahamaya is known as - “Sa” (“Avidya”), “Vidya” and “Parama – these three states and three names.
 
Those three “bhavas” or three states of Brahman’s Essential-Form and Shakti-Form are now being explained further.
 
The Reality of Brahman. In Nirguna [Attribute-less-ness], the three “bhavas” or three states and three names that happen are:
 
(1)     Nirguna bhava. In this “Nirguna bhava” [Attribute-less state], because the three aspects of time are in a still state, Brahman is “Sat” [Eternal Truth] – meaning: the Infinite, Inexpressible Consciousness-Truth. This state is “avAngmanasogocharah” – [meaning:] a state inaccessible to speech and mind.
 
This is that which is called “Ritam” – the Non-dual Awareness, the Yajna [Primal Fire] Itself, OM. And this is that which is known as “Brahman.” That is why it is said in the scriptures: “ṛtamekAksharaṃ brahma” [Ritam is the One Indestructible Brahman].
 
(2)      Nirguna-Saguna mishrabhava [the mixed state of Nirguna [without attributes] and Saguna [with attributes]. Because Brahman is Knowingness Itself in this state, it is called “Chit” [Consciousness] – meaning: the Expressed Effulgent Consciousness-Truth.
 
This is that which is “Satyam” – Infinite, distinction-free Knowingness, Formless Consciousness-Truth. And this is that which is known as “Paramatman” [Supreme Self]. That is why the scriptures say: “satya jnAnamanantaṃ brahman” [the Infinite Knowingness-Brahman is Satyam].
 
(3)     Purna Sagunabhava [the state with all attributes]. Because Brahman is Happiness Itself, it is called “Ananda” [Bliss] – meaning: the Expressed Effulgent Formed Consciousness-Truth.
 
This is that which is called “Param” – the Bliss-filled Consciousness-Truth with Form and distinction-endowed Knowingness. And this is that which is known by the names “Parameshvar” [Supreme God] or “Bhagavan” [the Blessed Lord]. That is why it is said in the scriptures: “paraṃ vijnAnamAnadaṃ brahma” [the Blissful Knowingness with particularities is Param]. This is the Primal Person, the “I” of the Cosmos, and it is He Who appears in the forms of “avatars” [incarnations of God] throughout the ages.
 
Brahman-Shakti: There are three “bhavas” or states and three names for Brahman-Shakti Maya as well. They are:
 
(1)     In sattva guna, Maya is known as “Jnanamayi” [knowledge/knowingness-imbued] and “Parama” [Supreme]. Another name for Parama is “Jnanashree” [knowledge/knowingness personified]. In Parama, Brahman is known as “Param Purush” [Supreme Person], “Uttama Purush” [Highest Person] or “Paramatman” [Supreme Self].
 
(2)     In rajoguna, Maya is known as “Kriyamayi” [activity-endowed] or “Bhaktimayi” [devotion-endowed] and “Vidya” [knowledge]. Another name for Vidya is “Vairagyashree” [detachment personified]. In Vidya, Brahman is known as “Akshara Purush” [Indestructible Person] or “Ishvara” [God].
 
(3)     In tamoguna, Maya is known as “Karmamayi” [works-endowed], “Icchamayi” [desire-endowed] or “Dravyamayi” [substances personified] and “Avidya” [unawareness; ignorance]. Another name for Avidya is “Vishayashree” [the worldly experience personified]. In Avidya, Brahman is known as “Kshara Purush” [the perishable person] or “jivatman” [the individual soul].
 
The “visarga” of Brahman [see item no. 3 in the previous or “first” commentary to slokas 8:3-4 for explanation of “visarga.”] In the state of Nirguna, Brahman’s Essence and Shakti are indivisibly merged together and exist as One. In this state, Brahman is Non-directed, Inexpressible and Inactive. When desire or wishfulness springs forth in the Saguna state, Brahman becomes “Param” [Supreme] or “Bhagavan” [Blessed Lord] and, taking on the Form of a Person, becomes the Primal Person, and, with the desire for creation [springing forth], desires or wishes to become “many.” That is why, it is said in the scriptures: “so’kAmayata bahusyama prajAyeya.” [He desired, “May I be many. May I be born.”] At that instant, just by wishing, the Essence and Shakti become distinct, and become “two” – with the names of “Purush” and “Prakriti.” That dividing and becoming “two” is that which is called His “visarga” (the Self revealing Itself in the form of two bindus [mystical points; in this case the points are thought of as positioned vertically, like the colon - “:” - symbol]) – the creation of the Particular. The top bindu [mystical point] of this bindu-duo named “visarga” is “Purush” [Person; Consciousness] and the lower bindu is “Prakriti” [the Creation-Power]. It is this Prakriti that is called “vishesh” [particular; distinct]. The manifestation of this Prakriti named “vishesh” is that which is called “the visarga of Brahman.” This is indeed the meaning of the word “visarga” in the path of pravritti or the path of creation.
 
In the path of nivritti or the path of dissolution [in the Self], “visarga” means “the opposite of this [nivritti].” “Vi” = opposite, “sarga” = creation; “visarga” – the dissolution of creation; the dissolution of the separateness of the Essence and Shakti. This means: the “vishesh” named Prakriti’s merging with Purush in layayoga [the yoga of dissolution/merging] and becoming One Undifferentiated Brahman is that which is called “visarga” in the path of nivritti.
 
(B) ADHYATMA
 
One’s Natural State is that which is called “Adhyatma” – “svabhAvo’dhyatmuchyate” [one’s Natural State is called “Adhyatma”; see first line of sloka 8:3 for the source phrase]. There are two meanings of this word [Adhyatma], relating to the differences in the paths of pravritti and nivritti. In this matter, there are two words – “bhava” [pronounced with a long middle “a”] and “atma” [both “a”s are long]. The meanings of these two words, “bhava” and “atma,” are very complex indeed. The meanings of “bhava” are: state of being, birth, emergence, settledness/poise, love, devotion, meaning, substance – etc. And the meanings of “atma” are: “‘AtmA dehe dhṛtau jeeve svabhAve paramAtmAni’ – ityamarah” – meaning: “atma” means: (1) body, (2) the established (another name is “jiva-Prakriti” [Prakriti as living beings] or “chaitanyaa-Prakriti” [Prakriti as consciousness; “chaitanyaa” is a feminine form of “chaitanya”], “yayedaṃ dhAryate jagat” – [meaning:] the One Who holds the creation), (4) “svabhava” (“bhava” [birth] coming from “sva” [self] – meaning: the one who has birth – that one is “svabhava” – meaning: the “jivatman” [personal being], the one who has been referred to as “mamaivAṃsha” [part of Me/Self]), and (5) Paramatman [Supreme Self] (“janmAdAsya yatah” – meaning: the One from whom the emergence, preservation and dissolution of creation takes place).
 
Like this, one word can indeed have many meanings. Which word will have what meaning in which place in the usage of scriptural language cannot be grasped by conceptual and inferential knowledge. Those who are “bhavuk” [absorbed in Spirit] – meaning: those who have Knowledge through spiritual practice in their spiritual enquiry – only they can grasp [the true/intended meanings [in scriptural language]]. This is that which is called “Vyasakuta” [hidden aspects in Vyasadeva’s words] – or “mysteries” – “gurumukhi vidya” [knowledge from guru’s mouth]. One has to know [the aforementioned true meanings] by practicing Kriya, upon having listened to the teachings from guru’s mouth.
 
The meaning [of Adhyatma or svabhava] in “pravritti-marga” [path of pravritti]. For the word “svabhava,” “sva” can mean both “Brahman” [the Absolute Supreme] and “jiva” [the individual soul]. And “bhava” can mean both “birth” and “settledness/poise.” When that “sva” (Brahman) is in the form of “Param” [see item no. 3 in section A above], and has the desire or wish to become “many” – having established Himself in “prakṛtiṃ svAmadhiShThAya” – [meaning:] presiding in His own Creative Power, takes up “bhava” (birth) in the “jiva-Prakriti” – at that time His name is “svabhava.” At that time, through the pure sattva guna of that jiva-Prakriti (of the “chaitanyaa-Prakriti” or “chit-shakti” [consciousness-power]), that Being’s (that svabhava’s) body comes into being. And that Being becomes the “person” – or the jivatman [individual being] – with a consciousness-filled body. Because that jivatman [personal soul] has “adhikar” [rulership] over that “atma” (meaning: over that consciousness-filled body), that Being is known as “Adhyatma” [meaning: presiding over “atma” [the consciousness-filled body]].
 
The meaning [of Adhyatma or svabhava] in “nivritti-marga” [path of nivritti]. Now, when “sva” (jivatman [personal soul]) leaves the worldly experience and goes to merge with Brahman, that being becomes “svabhava” then as well – (in “sva” = in the Self; “bhava” = settledness/poise; one who is established in the Self – that one is “svabhava”) meaning: one who becomes settled in the Self, or becomes established in the Field of the Self. And, at that time, that being attains “svabhava” or the “atma-bhava” [State of the Self]. It is when that attainment of “svabhava” takes place that that being has the “adhikar” [right] (“adhi” = “adhikar” [right]) to merge with one’s own Self or the Supreme Self, and that sadhak does indeed merge. That is why that being at that time is called “Adhyatma” [the one with the right to be one with the Self].
 
To sum it up: in both of the paths [of pravritti and nivritti], it is the jivatman [the conscious being] that is “Adhyatma.”
 
(C) KARMA
 
“Visargah karmasaṃjnitah” [karma is the action that causes manifestation of form]; see second line of sloka 8:3]. Here “visarga” means the yajna [fire ceremony] where substances or oblations are offered to the Divine. The “visarga” (yajna) that makes “udbhava” [furtherance] of “bhutabhava” [the birth of living beings] – that is called “Karma.” That form of yajna named “visarga” is of two types: (1) “Purush-yajna” and (2) “Prakriti-yajna” (“prana-yajna”). For this reason, Karma [rite] is also of two types: (1) “bhoga” [enjoyment] (“kama” [desire]) and (2) “yoga” [union] (“prema” [Love]).
 
When Purush [the Being] offers Its Self-Essence into Prakriti [Creation-Power] – when It surrenders the Self’s Potency [into Prakriti] – at that time there is the “bhava” (birth) of the “bhuta” (living being) and “udbhava” (expansion or positive progression). According to the scriptures, this is called “Purush-yajna.” This is that which is called “rati” (“bhoga” [enjoyment/partaking]). This is verily the “Karma” [act] in the path of pravritti, or “visrishti” – [meaning:] the separated creation.
 
And when Prakriti (jiva [personal soul]) offers the oblation of one’s self – surrenders one’s vital-force – offers the oblation of prana through pranayam – into Purush (into Ishvara [God] or Brahman), at that time there is “udbhava” (“ut” = above – meaning: in Brahman; “bhava” [both “a”s are short] = being/settledness) – meaning: there is the attainment of being established in Brahman. This is that which is called “Prakriti-yajna,” “prana-yajna” or “laya-yajna” [yajna of dissolution/resolution]. This is indeed that which is “rati viparita” [opposite of “rati” [see previous paragraph] or “yoga” (the Union of jiva [individual soul] with Brahman [the Absolute]). This is verily the “Karma” [act] in the path of nivritti – the dissolution of “visarga” or creation (Union with the Self, upon renouncing the worldly experience).
 
When that “rati” or enjoyment of pleasure becomes “dharmaviruddha” [does not oppose dharma] – when it does not go against dharma – then that transforms into the yoga named “rativiparita” [opposite to the worldly experience] (karmayoga [spiritual practice]). That is why the Lord has said: “dharmAviruddho bhooteShu kAmo’smi” [I am the Desire in all beings that is not against dharma].
 
The Kriyavan sadhaks will be able to understand all of the other matters [addressed in slokas 8:3-4] through their own direct, inner experience by doing Kriya. There is no doubt about this.