### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वगुह्यतमं भूय: शृणु मे परमं वच: |
इष्टोऽसि मे दृढमिति ततो वक्ष्यामि ते हितम् || 64||
sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ śhṛiṇu me paramaṁ vachaḥ
iṣhṭo ‘si me dṛiḍham iti tato vakṣhyāmi te hitam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Again hear from Me the supreme teaching that is most secret. You are absolutely dear to me. For that reason, I am telling you this for your benefit. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
No one is dear to the Lord, and no one is not dear either. He is the Ordainer of the fruits of karma [action]. However one’s karma is, He metes out the fruits according to that. And whichever way one receives Him, that is also how He receives that being. “Ye yathA mAṃ prapadyante tAṃstathaiva bhajAmAham” [in whatever way people surrender unto Me, I reciprocate accordingly]. Arjuna loves the Lord extremely. Therefore, the Lord also loves Arjuna extremely. Via the fruit of the karma [act] of loving [done by Arjuna], the Lord is giving love [to Arjuna]. According to the fruit that has come forth from [Arjuna’s] petitioning: “shiShyaste’haṃ shAdhi mAṃ tvAṃ prapannam” [teach me, who has taken refuge in You], [due to his] admitting to discipleship, and surrendering guilelessly, [the Lord] is bestowing upon [Arjuna] the teaching of Supreme Beneficence. In case Arjuna is still incapable, even after endlessly reflecting upon the exceedingly deep scripture of the [Bhagavad] Gita – that is why the Lord is gathering up the essence [of the teaching] and stating it in the next two slokas [18:65 and 18:66]. The essential meaning of this sloka [18:64] is this: the mystery of “I” – which is much deeper than even the deepest secret – which cannot be known if “mine” is cultivated and if there is contact with any other thing (that which does not come forth if there is even the slightest interaction with Prakriti – which remains secret – that is why it is “most secret”) – I am again telling you this great teaching for your benefit. This is because you have been doing devotional-practice to “I” until now and have become unmoving and still, and have become absolutely dear to “I”. (See Chapter 12, slokas 13 through 20 [of the Bhagavad Gita].)