### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
पश्य मे पार्थ रूपाणि शतशोऽथ सहस्रश: |
नानाविधानि दिव्यानि नानावर्णाकृतीनि च || 5||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
paśhya me pārtha rūpāṇi śhataśho ’tha sahasraśhaḥ
nānā-vidhāni divyāni nānā-varṇākṛitīni cha

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The Lord said: “O Partha [Arjuna]! Behold My hundreds upon hundreds, thousands upon thousands of Forms – innumerable types, Divine (supernatural), and of many colors and shapes.” 

### Commentary 
 --- 
[The longings expressed by the sadhak being in the state of “jiva” [separate soul] in the previous four slokas [of this Chapter 10 of the Pranab Gita] – those longings are being resolved from being in the State of the Self in these slokas 5-8 [of Chapter 10 of the Pranab Gita]. The Cosmic Form is beginning to be seen via the Divine Eye.] O “Partha”! (“Pṛth kshepane” [thrown off by the earth principle] – the sadhak who is unable to stay in an unbroken way in the Consciousness of the Self – that is the one who is “Partha” [still somewhat of the earth].) Behold. See the Forms of “I”. Hundreds upon hundreds, thousands upon thousands, no end in sight, limitless – see how That is. See how “I” AM One and how “I” am many, and again how, being many, AM One. All of it is the work of Space. There are no substances of construction. — Begin Translator’s Note. — A Bengali statement of a colloquial type is used here to express “there are no substances of construction.” The statement is: “kaali, tuli, khad, maati – kichui nai” [ink, cotton [or: brush of the pen], hay, mud – nothing at all is there]. It is not possible to translate that statement in literal English without causing confusion. Thus, the translators, while being literal in every place possible in this translation of the Pranab Gita, have chosen to make an exception here and translate what is meant by the aforementioned expression. — End Translator’s Note. — All of the kinds of colors – all are of Space. Innumerable shapes are formed in Space, hanging in Space; there is nothing to lean on nor is there any support. Without any support, the manifestation of each of the shapes are happening as if by themselves. No one is there helping another [to be manifested]. All are manifesting by themselves. 