### Prose 
 --- 
न रूपमस्येह तथोपलभ्यते
नान्तो न चादिर्न च सम्प्रतिष्ठा |
अश्वत्थमेनं सुविरूढमूल
मसङ्गशस्त्रेण दृढेन छित्त्वा || 3||
na rūpam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nānto na chādir na cha sampratiṣhṭhā
aśhvattham enaṁ su-virūḍha-mūlam
asaṅga-śhastreṇa dṛiḍhena chhittvā

तत: पदं तत्परिमार्गितव्यं
यस्मिन्गता न निवर्तन्ति भूय: |
तमेव चाद्यं पुरुषं प्रपद्ये
यत: प्रवृत्ति: प्रसृता पुराणी || 4||
tataḥ padaṁ tat parimārgitavyaṁ
yasmin gatā na nivartanti bhūyaḥ
tam eva chādyaṁ puruṣhaṁ prapadye
yataḥ pravṛittiḥ prasṛitā purāṇī

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
So that that kind of form (the type with the root up above and such) of the tree of samsara does not become manifested – not its end, not its beginning, not its staying, this ashvattha [see 15:1 of the Pranab Gita], with its extremely dense and binding root, must be fully cut down with the axe of non-attachment. And the “thing” that will ensure that the spiritual travelers do not ever again return [to this tree of samsara] – that “thing” has to be taken up. The One from Whom this endless, outwardly going samsara has spread out – I take refuge in that Primal Person (one has to take up [the spiritual practice] with one-pointed devotion in this way).

### Commentary 
 --- 
This imaginary samsara representing ashvattha tree [see 15:1 of the Pranab Gita] that has been made up – this is as unreal as a city in the sky that is made up of clouds. Even after the destruction of the city as the clouds change, the picture of the city that was previously seen has been taken in by the antahkarana [personal consciousness]. Just as that picture cannot again be erased, and that long afterwards, as needed, through the help of memory in the antahkarana, that city is shown again in oneself, yet at that time there is no remnant of that city present in front of the eyes outside the body, that it is the play of mind, that all of it being seen in the mind by the mind – in the same way, that imaginary ashvattha tree of samsara has no form at all. It is just imagined by the imagination. Thus, its beginning, end and middle cannot be found. That which does not exist at all, what can be its middle and end? Thus, this ashvattha tree has been made up because the antahkarana has taken on the imprint of that mentally-made tree. At some other time, whether it is in this lifetime, or after a hundred [after a long time], at sometime or another, this memory will be made to rise up again. The more the days pass, the more this imagined field in the antahkarana will become deeper and deeper. And according to that, its power will also grow. Through intense practice, and with the help of “para vairagya” [higher detachment], as one continually [and willingly] does not pay attention [to this samsara], when no desire arises to be with this samsara in the waking or dream or even the deep sleep state – it is only then that that firmly-rooted imaginary memory will be cut down/cut away. The method to cut down/cut away that memory is verily that detachment or non-attention [to that memory].
 
This “para vairagya” [see above paragraph] begins from the top of the Ajna-chakra. Dear sadhak! Take a look. All of the play of samsara exists until the Ajna-chakra. Now you have risen above the Ajna-chakra. Now you are non-doing. Now see: your physical, subtle and causal bodies are not there. And you are not an embryo in the womb of Prakriti. Like when a drop of oil falls on deep and endless body of water, that the particles of oil run so that they can cover the surface of all of the water – similar to that – see how you are now merging with the Infinite Expanse. Look now – what an incredibly beautiful Light is in front of you, even more beautiful than the glow of pure quicksilver. That Light is not something different [from you]. The Light is coming forth from you, verily, and is running as a current behind you. The Light has no boundaries. Where It is coming from – you yourself do not want to say. Know that you are going towards being an unexplainable boundlessness, which is well-witnessed, deep, full, profound, new, incomprehensible, beyond knowledge and analysis. That Boundlessness is the Form of Vishnu. “Vishnu” means the all-pervading Consciousness-Self. And becoming that Boundlessness is the “Vaishnavi Marg” [the path of a “Vaishnava” [devotee of Vishnu]; or: the path of Vishnu]. Because you are merging in Vishnu and are taking on that Vishnu-ness, you are “Vaishnava.” The one who worships Vishnu – that is the one who is “Vaishnava.” Now see another wonderful glory! From below this ever-new depth of Concentrated Consciousness, the revelatory light of Mahat is blazing forth. The union of Prakriti and Purush – right now you are just at its junction-point. See it fully, and understand it. As much as that light [of Mahat] comes to you, that much does it make the essence of its partner blossom. What incredible beauty! The coming together of light and dark! The current-flow that is going in the opposite direction – as that is the creation-facing vritti [active force] (pravritti [outward-directed active force]), it is the offspring of Maya. And your taking on nivritti [inward-directed active force; withdrawal] and came upward out of samsara – this is that current’s “dakshina” [right-hand; southern] flow. That is why this direction of the flow is called “Radha” [Krishna’s beloved; the beloved of the Lord]. The opposite to the [downward] flow is verily “Radha.”
 
[Bengali couplet]
 
“brahma hote sristhtimukhi drishti dhara ‘bandha’
srishti hote brahmamukhi ta’re boli ‘radha’”
 
[The perception and flow in the direction of creation from Brahman is “bandha” [bondage]. The [flow] that is in the direction of Brahman from creation is called “Radha” [Krishna’s beloved; the beloved of the Lord].]
 
And this [upward] flow comes and merges with you and becomes “I”; this is indeed Krishna. That is why the sages have said: “vAme taDitachArvangee rAdhA dakshe sushyAmalam; kṛShNaṃ kamalapAtrakshaṃ rAdhAkṛShNaṃ bhajAmahyam” [on the left, the lightning-formed Radha; on the right the Beautiful Dark One; the Lotus-Eyed Krishna – I worship Radha-Krishna]. This State – this, which is the “I” State – when one comes into this “I” – meaning: upon expelling the last breath from the body, which is of samsara, if one reaches this “I”, there is no returning to samsara. You are this Beginning-less Person – “I”, the “I” from which – look and see – that Ancient Mahamaya is giving birth to pravritti [outward life]. It is this path that is appropriate for the sincerely longing sadhaks [spiritual aspirants].

— Begin Added Section. — The Purush form of Brahman (of the Self) is called “urdhva” [up], and the form of Prakriti is called “adhah” [down]. The mantra-seeing sages see the form of Purush and the form of Prakriti as two bindus sitting above and below[, respectively]. The bindu above is the Sat-Chit-Ananda-filled Brahman-bindu, and the bindu below is the sattva-rajas-tamas-filled Prakriti-bindu. With the wish to go outward, the wholeness of Prakriti takes on separateness with the three gunas. In that, Prakriti divides into three, according to the three gunas, with the knowledge-endowed “naad-shakti” for sattva guna (mark goes here), the action-endowed or desire-endowed “bindu-shakti” for rajoguna (mark goes here), and the “kalaa-shakti” for the delusion-endowed tamoguna (mark goes here), and takes on three forms with the three names. Then, that “naad” (mark goes here), “bindu” (mark goes here) and “kalaa” (mark goes here), being below Brahman-bindu (residing in the lower area), and being in contact with it [or: that; it is unclear as to what “it” or possibly “that” refers], takes on the forms of the three letters, respectively: “anusvara” (Sanskrit letter goes here), “visarga” (Sanskrit letter goes here) and “chandrabindu” (Sanskrit letter goes here). The Consciousness-Purush, being reflected in these, takes on the forms of the presiding gods of three letters with the names of, respectively: Vishnu, Brahmaa and Rudra. Those three letters are the Primal Person’s (Brahman’s) letters-endowed three forms, [respectively] named “urdhvalinga,” “virupaksha” and “vishwaroopa.”
 
Prakriti is the Avyakta Omkar-form. That Omkar is that which is called the “world” or the form of the “universe.” “Bindu” is the extremely subtle beginning of the blossoming of the Omkar. That is the Anahata Sound. “Naad” [sound] is the blossomed state of Omkar. That is “dhvani” [resonance] (“sur” [tone; melody] or “jhankar” [resonating sound]). And “kalaa” is the fully revealed state of Omkar. That is the “dhvani”-enjoined light. Due to the pull of pravritti, “kalaa” becomes enjoined to rajo-tamas guna and is seen as an unclear moonlight covered by fine, smokey-dark clouds. And with the pull of nivritti and thus becoming enjoined to sattva guna, [kalaa is seen as] the comely, luminous, enchanting, white moonlight. It is in that white light that the mind attains dissolution [merging]. That is why, in sloka 1:423 of the Uttara Gita it is said: “anahatasya shabdasya tasya shabdasya yo dhvanih; dhvanirgataṃ jyoti jyotiranrgata manah; tanmanye vilayaṃ yAti tadviShNoh pramaṃ padam [in the anahata sound, dhvani; in dhvani, light; mind goes in the light; mind becomes absorbed and dissolves in the Supreme Vishnu-Substance].” In the path of pravritti, “kalaa” makes the jiva universe-formed, ties it in the bindings of embedded desires, and makes it go round and round endlessly in the current of birth and death. But, in the path of nivritti, that very “kalaa” becomes “prasanna” [appeased] (becomes the sattva-filled, still, white light), makes the jiva be free of desires, gives it the Form of Brahman, takes it beyond the enclosing perimeter of death, and makes it be victorious over death. That is why the nivritti-endowed, great yogi Shiva, witnessing “kalaa” in the Shiva-netra [Shiva-eye] at all times, attained the state of being victorious over death.

The progression of the manifestations of the three forms of that state of “krishnapingala” and “urdhvalinga” and such, and their descriptions, are as follows.
 
(1) “Krishnapingala” – at first, due to being under the power of the developing of the gunas in the pravritti-shakti, two conditions – “krishna” [dark-form] and “pingala” [yellow-form] – blossom in the Primal Person. On His right side, the essence-part, the dark-form is had, and on His left side, the shakti-part, the yellow-form is had. That dark state is attraction, the “non-doing” masculine state, and the yellow state is the attractive, active power, the “doing” feminine state. In this way, together in one place, with the meeting of “non-doing” and “doing,” male and female, with both being next to each other, a condition of “Ardhanareeshvara” [Divinity as half-male and half-female] blossoms forth. That is why His name is “Krishnapingala.” This state of His is also non-apparent, beyond the senses.
 
(2) “Urdhvalinga” – after the blossoming of the “krishnapingala” condition, the wish to go outward grows in that Primal Person. Then, directed by ego-identification/ego-vanity, in order to create the world, takes on a form of linga, becoming the root cause, or causal reason for creation, done by uniting with the knowledge-endowed Shakti of Prakriti. Because it is upward-directed, that linga-form is called “urdhvalinga” [upward linga], Brahman-linga or “punglinga” [male-linga].
 
Creation does not happen only with the [operation of] causal reason in the form of “urdhvalinga.” There has to be a causal space or a causal receiver. That causal receiver is His “things-knowledge-operator” Prakriti. But even though that Prakriti of His is experienced, until that time, She has not become “visargita” [fully separate] (created as exclusively separate) from Him. She stays One with Him, and She Herself is in the upward form and identifies Her “I” with the Brahman-Purush.
 
He is the all-pervading Self. Even after taking the form of linga, He is still Inexpressible. In the form of linga, he is in the Causal Body, the seed-mantra connected with “anusvara” [see previously mentioned Sanskrit letters in this added section]. It is in the form that he becomes the seed of the cosmos, and because he is now the self that identifies with the knowingness-endowed causal body, he is known as “praajna” [knowing function].
 
(3) “virupaksha” – upon the Primal Person taking on the form of “urdhvalinga” – then the desire of Prakriti springs forth even more (it grows and spreads), and Prakriti abandons her own causal state and takes on an extremely subtle form beyond the senses. Then the Primal Person, due to that desire, makes himself “visargita” [created more] – meaning: he takes his shaktis (the many forms of Prakriti below) from the upward state (from the state of Brahman or the masculine state), separates them like the double-bindu “visarga” [see previously mentioned Sanskrit letters] (Sanskrit letter goes here). This is that which is his “visarga” [individuated] creation or creation with particular identities of Prakriti. This particular aspect is his energy-filled “aksha” (things, knowledge, operation-endowed senses) – meaning: material cause. That is also “virupa” – meaning: without form, non-apparent, beyond the senses. Just as He is Avyakta Purush, similarly His Shakti separates and becomes Avyakta Prakriti. This Avyakta Prakriti is verily the material cause of His creation – “adholinga,” “prakritilinga,” or “strilinga” (the yoni of the cosmos).
 
Because this separated, material form of Prakriti (senses) is “virupa” (without form – non-apparent), he/she is “virupaksha” – meaning: the dual-form of the non-apparent Purush-Prakriti. Taking on this dual-form of “virupaksha,” he/she becomes “me/mine-oriented.” This energy-filled, subtle “jnanaroopatilalasa” [desirous-consciousness-form] Prakriti is the one who builds his/her subtle body. And becomes this energy-filled, subtle-body-oriented self, he/she becomes known as “taijas.”
 
(4) “Vishwaroopa” – the one whose form is the cosmos, that is the one who is “vishwaroopa.” The limited and changing Avyakta Prakriti, transformed by the operations of the three gunas into the seven mutations and the twenty-four substances, manifests itself as the physical form, and also makes the Inexpressible Primal Person become formed through manifesting in a physical form built from the aforementioned substances. That physical form is that which becomes his physical body. In that the created things such as the seven heavens, seven hells etc., and such aspects of the universe come together. Then he becomes “me/mine-oriented” in that physical body, and becomes known as the “vishwa” [cosmos/universe], and because he manifests in the “roopa” [form] of that “vishwa” [cosmos] his name is “vishwaroopa.”
 
Just as Avyakta Prakriti in her pravritti-mode dresses up the Primal Person in the covering of Maya in the previously mentioned way, similarly, in the nivritii-mode, she removes the dress of Maya and returns him to the Form of Brahman. Because the tri-guna[-endowed] Avyakta Prakriti must end, whatever she manifests, she again merges it back to Avyakta. This is the activity of the three gunas – the game of creation, preservation, dissolution.
 
There are two states of the creator Brahmaa called “ahah” and “ratri.” In Chapter 8, sloka 18 of the Bhagavad Gita, it is stated that all of the universes that are manifested (created) during Brahmaa’s “aharagam” – meaning: when it is his “day” – all of that, during “ratragam” – meaning when it is his “night,” is dissolved, and does not last until the next “day.” They are not permanent. That is why the universe is named “ashvattha.” “Ashvattha” – not lasting until “shva” (the next day) – impermanent. Only Brahman is permanent. Everything other than That is impermanent. In scriptures, the Permanent is called “Eternal Truth,” and the impermanent is called “non-eternal/temporal truth” or “false.”
 
This universe-tree named “ashvattha” is with the root up above and the branches below. This is verily the “Virat Moorti” [great form] of the Primal Person. It is from this that the many universes are created, that there is the emergence of gods, humans and many such living beings. From the “I” of this “Virat Purush” form, the creation, preservation and destruction are taking place of many living beings identified with small “I”s. This is that which is “samsara” – the endless current of creation-preservation-destruction. This is flowing endlessly. That is why the other name for the universe-tree is “samsara-vriksha” [samsara-tree], and because it is endless, it is “avyaya” [inexhaustible].
 
The body of the jiva [living being] is [in] three forms – the causal body, the subtle body and the physical body. The causal body of the jiva is “chinmaya” [knowing-filled]. Just as the Consciousness-Essence is the Chaitanya Purush – in the same way, the knowing-power is the Chaitanya Prakriti or Maya. Because it is formed by the ignorant-part of that knowing-power-formed Maya, the “chinmaya” causal body of the jiva is ignorance-rooted, and that is the cause of the jiva’s “jiva-ness” or its seed. It is in that chinmaya causal body that the jiva’s subtle body and physical body, like a tree with the root and branches together, grow. That is why the body of the jiva follows the dharma of the tree. That is why the two bodies (subtle and physical bodies) that are the coverings of the chinmaya causal body form and grow similar to a tree. Among those two bodies, the subtle body is power-filled, and the physical body is the operational instrument of that power. To the human being, his/her own body is itself the universe-tree, the samsara-tree or the world.
 
The body of the human being too is with the root up above and the branches below. The one who knows this tri-substanced body – that one is “vedavit” [knower of knowledge], and that one, knowing the True Form of the Self beyond the body (the Self of the jiva, or his/her own Self), becomes free of vanity/me-identification and free of delusion, surrenders him/herself, and becomes competent for the discipline of finding out the “That-substance.” The process of the human body’s emergence, and its description is in the last part of the [section called] “Practice of Sadhana” in the Introduction [to the Pranab Gita]. That should be read.