### Prose 
 --- 
सुखं त्विदानीं त्रिविधं शृणु मे भरतर्षभ |
अभ्यासाद्रमते यत्र दु:खान्तं च निगच्छति || 36||
sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ śhṛiṇu me bharatarṣhabha
abhyāsād ramate yatra duḥkhāntaṁ cha nigachchhati

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Bharatarshabha [Arjuna]! Now hear from Me about the matters of the three types of happinesses, by which, due to the fruits of practice, Supreme Bliss is had and the end of suffering is attained. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
Now, the Lord is speaking to Arjuna about the matter of happiness – that happiness too is of three types due to the distinctions of the gunas such as sattva etc. What is the thing called “happiness”? Oh but this: so He is saying – that in which, due to the fruits of practice, Supreme Bliss is had and suffering is removed – that is “happiness.” The discipline of keeping mind still is called “practice.” “Suffering” means pains/troubles. These are of three types – “adhyatmik” [spiritual], “adhidaivik” [subtle] and “adhibhautik” [material]. The pain that is there from not getting the Company of the Supreme Self – that is adhyatmik suffering (this is mental). Because of opposition from “daiva” [the unseen] – meaning: the pain that is there due to the restrictions imposed by the gathered fruits of previously done actions causing failure or the blocking of an act [in the present] – that is adhidaivik suffering (this is mental and physical). And the pain that is born of the disturbances of vata-pitta-kapha [bodily humors – wind-bile-phlegm] – that is adhibhautik suffering (this is physical). The Lord is saying, “That in which, upon ending all of these sufferings, one has Supreme Bliss – that is ‘happiness.’ But how, due to the differences in the gunas, happiness too takes on three forms – I am telling you. Listen.”