### Prose 
 --- 
अव्यक्ताद्व्यक्तय: सर्वा: प्रभवन्त्यहरागमे |
रात्र्यागमे प्रलीयन्ते तत्रैवाव्यक्तसञ्ज्ञके || 18||
avyaktād vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ prabhavantyahar-āgame
rātryāgame pralīyante tatraivāvyakta-sanjñake

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
All beings (moving and non-moving living beings) emerge from the Avyakta [Inexpressible] at the coming of the day, and at the coming of the night, they merge back again into that same Avyakta – which is Cause.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Avyakta” [Inexpressible] = Prakriti [Manifestation-Power]. It is from this Prakriti that “sarva” [all] – meaning: everything that there is in creation – comes forth. Dear sadhak! Now see! When you were serving the worldly experience due to the intoxication with illusion – at that time these worldly experiences were actually enjoying/consuming you! When, by the grace of sadguru, you pierced the Ajna-chakra, only then did your “ahah” [explanation follows] come. “Ahah” is that time when the night is going away and day is about to come – that time. The sun is just about to rise; it will not be long before it comes up – this time period. At this time, even every hair of the body can be clearly seen. After piercing the Ajna-chakra and having come near Vivasvan [see commentary to slokas 1-2 of Chapter 4 of the Pranab Gita], I am seeing Prakriti’s beauty, vitality, magnetic power – all of these, one by one. That all of these have come from Avyakta-Prakriti, I am clearly knowing this. I am becoming firm in my resolve. I will never again fall into the trap of Prakriti. [Dear sadhak!] How is it? Can you see [all of this]? This is the state before your paravastha of Kriya. This is the road to Emancipation. And, that time when you first “tightened your belt” to become a jiva [embodied being] – meaning: when you took the downward path to become intoxicated in the play of samsara – remember that time of yours just once. (See Chapter 4, slokas 1-2 [of the Pranab Gita].) When you turned your back to Vivasvan and looked toward the lower part of the chitta and gave refuge to ahamkar [ego], and after that took up the mind, and taking up the mind, became intoxicated in the worldly experience – that is verily your deep “night” in the form of ignorance, falling into whose darkness you lost even the ability to see your own “I”. This is your day and your night. When you remain in the Self, then you are all-knowing. And you lose your Self, then you forget all knowledge and dress yourself up as “ignorant,” and you drown yourself in Avyakta [Prakriti].