### Prose 
 --- 
सञ्जय उवाच ।
दृष्ट्वा तु पाण्डवानीकं व्यूढं दुर्योधनस्तदा ।
आचार्यमुपसङ्गम्य राजा वचनमब्रवीत् ।। 2।।
sañjaya uvācha
dṛiṣhṭvā tu pāṇḍavānīkaṁ vyūḍhaṁ duryodhanastadā
āchāryamupasaṅgamya rājā vachanamabravīt

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Sanjaya said, “Seeing the soldiers of the Pandava side in battle array, king Duryodhana then went to Dronacharya and spoke thusly.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Sanjaya uvacha” [Sanjaya said] = the meaning of this sentence is seen in the commentary of the 21st sloka, [item] (2), and see [as well] the commentary of the 1st sloka of the 2nd Chapter. The way an actor, when acting on stage, takes on different roles with different clothes and make-up, yet he/she remains who he/she always was – in that same way, one person, sometimes taken over by wrong thoughts takes on the forms of lust, anger, greed and such, and then again, when taken over by good thoughts takes on the forms of serenity, self-control, endurance [and such]. In just the same manner as that, the sadhak, while going on the path of sadhana with guru-initiated Kriya, from time to time, sometimes perceives the Gita as Dhritarashtra, sometimes as Sanjaya, sometimes as Duryodhana and that side, and sometimes as Arjuna and Sri Krishna. Therefore, the statements “Dhritarashtra said,” and “Sanjaya said” have to be taken as the aforementioned representations of the various states [of consciousness].
 
King “Duryodhana”: (“Duh” = in sorrow/suffering; “yudh” = to make war; fight + “an”) - Fighting while suffering – meaning: the one with whom fighting is possible with great struggle and effort – that is “Duryodhana.” It is this Duryodhana that is the “kAmarupaṃ durAsadaṃ” [desire in formidable form] in the third chapter. Thus, desire, or the desire for worldly wants is called “Duryodhana.” It is also called “abhimaan” [egotism; self-importance]. This desire is prime in the group of manovritti, and [it is] the most powerful, for which reason it is known as the eldest son [in Indian culture, the eldest son is thought to preside over the clan] of Dhritarashtra (mind). And as the mind is put in endless motion because of being under this very aspect's [desire's] power, and because of its [desire's] influence spread out in the whole of the body, it is “king.” This is the sadhak's worldly-desire-bound, ego-centered state.
 
“vyooDhaṃ pANDavAneekaṃ dṛShTvA”
 
The battle-arrayed Pandavas [Arjuna's side] are in the western part of Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra, and they are engaging in battle while facing east and witnessing the sun-sphere. And the Kauravas [Duryodhana's side] are standing in the eastern part and facing the west – meaning: facing worldliness – because of which they are there with the sun behind them.
 
The front part of the body-sheath is called “east”; the back part is called “west”; the right side is called “south”; and the left side is called “north.” It is in the direction of the east within this [body-]sheath that the “Savitrimandal” [sun] can be seen. If one is a sadhak, he/she already knows this. When one arrives at the “path” of sadhana after having attained the “chatushtaya” [quartet] of sadhana [including] detachment, serenity, self-control and such — Begin Footnote. — The sadhana “chatushtaya”[quartet] are: 1) “nityAnityavastuvivekah” [discrimination between the Eternal and the temporal] – meaning: the Eternal Thing is the One Brahman; other than this, everything that exists is temporal [ends] – this knowledge; 2) “ihamutrArthaphalabhoga virAgah” - meaning: the abandoning of the desire for pleasure in this life and heaven in the afterlife. 3) “shamyAdi Shat sampattih” [the six assets such as serenity etc.] - meaning: “shama” [serenity] = control of mind; “dama” [self-control] = control of the external oriented senses such as the eyes etc.; “titiksha” [forbearance/endurance] = tolerance of the sufferings of cold and heat, pleasure and pain and such; “uparati” [austerity] = the practice of one's true dharma [acting according to one's true nature]; “shraddha” [reverence] = faith in the teachings of guru; “samadhan” [resolve] = one-pointed consciousness; [and] 4) “mumukshatvaṃ” [spiritual longing] – meaning: “O Lord! Let me be Liberated!” - this determined desire. — End Footnote. — – meaning: upon witnessing the Light of the [inner] Sun in the “eastern” direction, the ego-bound [vrittis] stand in front of the vrittis supporting the path of Sat, and try to turn the sadhak away [from the direction of Sat]. Thus, the team of discrimination, detachment [and such] are east-facing and the ego-bound team of great delusions are west-facing. This fight while directly facing each other – this is verily the “sadhana-battle.” The name of this sadhana-battle is “Kriya.”

It is at the start of Kriya that the sadhana-supportive and nivritti-sided group of vrittis such as serenity and self-control etc. become visible on the screen of desirousness; it is this that [is stated as] the “witnessing of the Pandava-soldiers by Duryodhana.”
 
 
“AchAryamupasangamya”
 
The “acharya” [teacher] is Drona. [Although] he was born in the brahmin caste, he took up the life-path of kshatriyas, and gave instructions on the martial arts to both Kurus and Pandavas. [It is like] the way that a crow sees only through one eye at a time; even though it has two eyes it cannot see completely through both eyes at the same time. In the same way, this person [Drona], even though he was guru to both sides, took one of the sides as his own. This Drona is what is known as “samskaric buddhi” [thinking based on latent impressions or samskaras]. Every act, whether good or bad, becomes mutated to samskaras [inner impressions with active power]; therefore, whatever kind of thinking that [eventually] forms [as a samskara] from an action, whether good or bad, has the jiva expressing itself in either of those directions [of good or bad]. Thus, he [Drona] is guru to two sides: to persons of worldly ways and those who desire liberation. Although this [type of] thinking flows in all directions, because of not being scrubbed – meaning: because of not being purified – it remains bound to samsara alone. Even if it looks towards detachment, it cannot act according to that direction. This is the very reason for Drona being aligned with the Kaurava side. At the beginning of Kriya, the vritti represented by Duryodhana, upon becoming aware of the vrittis represented by the Pandavas, tries to make sure that the “samskaric buddhi” [see above] is strengthened towards giving sustenance to the feelings of samsara, and that the samskaric buddhi does not become a giver of sustenance to [the feelings of] detachment. This is the meaning behind “[Duryodhana] going to the teacher – Drona.”
 
“vachanaṃ abraveet”
 
Speaking statements of wisdom that would require many words in a succinct yet heart-captivating way is called “vachana.” (See the essential meaning of this in the commentary to the 1st sloka.) That is what is spoken about in the next nine slokas.