### Prose 
 --- 
महर्षीणां भृगुरहं गिरामस्म्येकमक्षरम् |
यज्ञानां जपयज्ञोऽस्मि स्थावराणां हिमालय: || 25||
maharṣhīṇāṁ bhṛigur ahaṁ girām asmyekam akṣharam
yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I am “Bhrigu” among the “maharshi[s],” the single syllable [OM] in speech/words/sounds, “japayajna” among “yajna[s]” and “Himalaya” among “sthavar[s].”

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Maharshi[s]” ([see] Chapter 10, sloka 6) are the ones who have attained all of the divine powers through the power of sadhana. Among them, I am “Bhrigu.” “Bhri” = to fill; and “gu” = darkness. Nothing is discernible in darkness. For this reason, sagacious personages refer to ignorance as “darkness.” In comparison to the Awareness of Brahman, the happenings of karma [action] is this ignorance. Thus, even after attaining divine powers through the power of sadhana, the one who still goes about in the happenings of karma [action] – that is the person who is called “Bhrigu.” But even though that sage is playing around in the happenings of karma [action], “Bhrigu” is never separated from the Awareness of Brahman. The one who, without ever separating, remains absorbed in the Awareness of Brahman – that great sage is, verily, “I”. Because the happenings of karma [action] and the State of Brahman-Knowledge are both present in Bhrigu, among “maharshis” [see beginning of this commentary], “I” am “Bhrigu.”
 
“Gira” means speech/words/sounds.  In all speech/words/sounds, My speech/word/sound is the single syllable Pranava [OM]. Thus, among speech/words/sounds, “I” verily am the Pranava [OM].
 
YajnAnAṃ japayajno’smi [among yajnas I am the “japayajna”; see last sentence of this paragraph] – among “yajnas” [spiritual acts] I am the “ajapa-japa” [automatic inner recitation of mantra] yajna, and it is by this that the Settledness in Brahman is attained. To offer “saphalya” [particular oblations for attainment; definition follows] in fire in order to attain something is called “yajna.” (Sesame, barley, rice paddy [rice with husk] and ghee mixed together is called “saphalya.”) To fill the stomach with food is also called “yajna.” The putting out through the out-breath and the taking in through the in-breath – these together are also called “yajna.” There are many types of yajnas in the world. Among them, I am the yajna of “ajapa” [source-less recitation of mantra]. “Japa” [recitation of mantra from a source] is that which (by the practice of which) the practitioner of the japa is made one with the Beloved Deity. This statement is about the inner. In the exterior, the separated-state that exists between the sadhak and “I” – the ending of this separation via guru-instructed Kriya, and the state of “svayamevaAtmanAmAnam” [knowing Oneself by Oneself] that comes about – that is what is called “japayajna” [inner spiritual practice being the yajna].
 
SthAvarANAṃ himAlayah [among “sthavar[s]” [immovables], I am “Himalaya”] – “sthavar” means that which never moves. The word “stha” means “established.” The word “var” means the greatest/highest – meaning: among all of the highest places of settledness (the repose for the sadhak) that there are, [I am] Himalaya among them. “Him” means “coolness/cold” (where there is no heat; restlessness is heat itself); “alaya” means “house/home” – meaning: living where there is no anxiety/disturbance. “A” [long version] = void; “la” = limitation. That which is immovable, unwavering, still, peaceful, calm and cool, devoid of limitation – that is what is called “Himalaya.” And “I” Am That.