### Prose 
 --- 
एवं बहुविधा यज्ञा वितता ब्रह्मणो मुखे |
कर्मजान्विद्धि तान्सर्वानेवं ज्ञात्वा विमोक्ष्यसे || 32||
evaṁ bahu-vidhā yajñā vitatā brahmaṇo mukhe
karma-jān viddhi tān sarvān evaṁ jñātvā vimokṣhyase

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Like this, there are many types of yagya which are spoken about from the mouth of Brahmaa [the creator aspect of the Hindu Trinity] (in the Vedas). Know all of those to be born of action. Knowing in this way, you will be able to attain Liberation.

### Commentary 
 --- 
In the “dharaabeeja” [foundational seed] in the Muladhar resides Brahmaa [creator aspect of the Hindu Trinity], with the arms of the Vedas (“chaturbhuja” [four-armed form]). It is from his lotus-mouth that the Vedas are being recited - “mukhAnbhojalakshmeeshchachaturbhAgavedah” [from the mouth of the consort of Lakshmi comes the Veda in four parts]. Thus, the Vedas are also known as “the mouth of Brahmaa.” The triangle-shaped yoni that is within the square-shaped abode of the earth-element – the mouth of the sushumna is there exactly in the middle of that yoni; that mouth is indeed the mouth of Brahmaa. The mother of the Vedas – Gayatri – resides in that very place. It is from that place that the many types of Vedic yagya come forth. This can be seen. — Begin Footnote. — Whatever there is to be seen or heard from wherever – all happen [meaning: are known] by simply having stilled attention in the Kutastha in the middle of the eyebrows. It is for this reason that guru gives “agya” [directive] to still prana in the middle of the eyebrows. It is because of such “agya” [directive] that the name of the chakra in the middle of the eyebrows is called “Agya-chakra.” — End Footnote. — All of those emerge from the “kayic,” “vachiki” and “manasik” karmas [karmas of body, speech and mind – respectively] – meaning: amongst the repertoire of rites, all of the kinds of rites that can be performed by the body, mind and speech – when those happen, all of those many [other] kinds of yagyas emerge [as well]. In the state of non-doing which is beyond karma [actions and their fruits], where the True Form of the Self is revealed – none of these [karmas [rites]] exist there. If one knows this wisdom in the steady concentrated focus that comes about from the practice of Kriya, one attains Liberation. One never again has to fall into the bondage of samsara.