### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वत: पाणिपादं तत्सर्वतोऽक्षिशिरोमुखम् |
सर्वत: श्रुतिमल्लोके सर्वमावृत्य तिष्ठति || 14||
sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat sarvato ’kṣhi-śhiro-mukham
sarvataḥ śhrutimal loke sarvam āvṛitya tiṣhṭhati

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
That [Brahman] has hands and feet established fully everywhere, has eyes, head and mouth established fully everywhere, has the hearing sense established fully everywhere, and is pervading all of the substances of the worlds/planes of existence. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
When air does not move [much] in a cloud-covered day, causing an oppressive heat, it is not accurate to say in this case that the sky is without air/wind. This is because air/wind, at this time, stays in a state that is not so apparent. Because the touch sense in the jiva [individual incarnation] is very physical/gross in nature, it cannot feel the touch of that very subtle state of air. The subtle can go into the physical. The physical cannot go into the subtle. This is the reason for this [not being able to experience the subtle air]. Similarly, in the Boundless, Infinite Brahman, hands, feet, eyes, hearing, the head which is the container of mental power, and mouth and such – all of the operative powers that there are in creation, all of them are in the “non-apparent but present” state – like salt in salty water – even covering up space itself in Its abyss. “Tat e” – there is no place where this active power is in lesser or greater amounts. The Essence is One and the same everywhere.

 2nd meaning: when the sadhak [practitioner] knows well the grand play of the cosmos, then he/she sees that in this [cosmos] there is revelation by sattva [guna], operation by rajas [guna] and settledness by tamas [guna]. Other than these three, there is no other essence [of visible creation]. The coming together of these three and becoming one is Maya. That Maya also belongs to “I”. And that non-essential Maya’s mutations are again these three [gunas]. Thus, they are emergence-giving and destructive as well. Furthermore, in this, there are three “taap[s]” [pressures; intensities; heats; tensions]. If there is playing around with phenomena, there is a “taap.” That is called “adhibhautik taap” [phenomena-based “taap”]. Playing around with gods, there is another “taap.” That is called “adhidaivik taap” [subtle-world-based “taap”]. And playing around with the Self, there is [yet another] “taap.” That is called “adhyatmik taap” [spiritual “taap”]. This too is a mutation [not Truth]. When this became known with certainty, then the sadhak, in order to be separate from this [the “taaps”], sat down with a type of Kriya that is an activity devoid of cause (meaning: that by which all doing/causality disappears). The deeper the practice of this Kriya went on, the more the sadhak went on seeing that he/she is separate from everything in every stage. When nothing else at all was able to touch the sadhak again, then contraction ended in the sadhak and magnanimity/openness came forth. In this magnanimity/openness, all of the contracted-ness that there was previously – the sadhak took them too and destroyed their contracted states, brought them in to the state of magnanimity/openness, and merged them [both states] into Oneself. Then, both magnanimity/openness and contraction were in “abhaav” [non-state; gone]. This settled state where both [magnanimity/openness and contraction] are in the state of oneness – this settled state is that which is known as the “tadbrahma” [That Brahman] State of the sadhak. The unripened sadhak comes down from this State to samsara and thereafter understands that the previous state of the sadhak’s own Self is that which is called “Tat” [That] (Brahman) – the “Tat” that has hands and feet fully established everywhere, has eyes, head and mouth fully established everywhere, has hearing everywhere, and is pervading all in all of the worlds/planes.