### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
काम एष क्रोध एष रजोगुणसमुद्भव: ||
महाशनो महापाप्मा विद्ध्येनमिह वैरिणम् || 37||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
kāma eṣha krodha eṣha rajo-guṇa-samudbhavaḥ
mahāśhano mahā-pāpmā viddhyenam iha vairiṇam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The Lord said, “This rises from the rajoguna – the intense desire, impossible to fulfill. This is anger. Know this to be the “vairee” [evil] (enemy) here (in the path of Liberation).

### Commentary 
 --- 
The sadhak is knowing through self-search: desire is verily the reason for this [see sloka 3:36 above for the query]. Just as desire is the wish to have something, similarly the wish to not have anything or get rid of anything is also desire. This desire comes forth from the rajoguna, which is spread out from the Agya to the Muladhar. Craving is the cause itself – the activity of rajas. — Begin Footnote. — The activity of sattva – contentment; the activity of tamas – settledness. — End Footnote. — While doing pranayam, for as long as the mind does not enter the Agya through the brahmanadi, for that long does that craving, or the attraction to worldly experiences remain. It tries to pull the mind away; it eventually does take the helpless mind. If that pull happens according to the wish, then the desire transforms into joy. And if that happens against the wish, then disdain/hate shows up. Actually, joy and hate are two types of the limited results of desire. Both of these results are operatively the same. Both bind the mind in the worldly experience. But because the destructive power of hate is greater [than joy], the emphasis has been put on that [aspect], and desire has been called “anger” [in this sloka]. This desire deludes the mind, making the mind lose self-awareness and lose its way, as well as stopping the mind's upward movement. That is why desire is “vairee” [evil]. And again, even if one stays for an endless amount of time in enjoyments and indulgence, desire is never fulfilled. That is why desire is “mahashan” [voracious] [see 2nd line of sloka 3:37 above for the occurrence of the word]. And because one does not find settledness even after getting something that is desired, desire is “mahapapma” [sinful; evil] [see 2nd line of sloka 3:37 above for the occurrence of the word]. (Not holding on to the desirable or the undesirable, not even paying attention to the results to be attained from karma [yogic act], if one takes recourse in Kriya as a duty, one does not again have to fall into restlessness/agitation.) 