### Prose 
 --- 
पश्यैतां पाण्डुपुत्राणामाचार्य महतीं चमूम् ।
व्यूढां द्रुपदपुत्रेण तव शिष्येण धीमता ।। 3।।
paśhyaitāṁ pāṇḍu-putrāṇām āchārya mahatīṁ chamūm
vyūḍhāṁ drupada-putreṇa tava śhiṣhyeṇa dhīmatā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O teacher of the sons of Pandu! Please observe the huge group of soldiers of the Pandava side, who are dressed in battle gear and have been readied for war by Dhrishtadyumna.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The son of Drupada – Dhrishtadyumna – [represents] the Light of Consciousness. All of the vrittis belonging to the group of discrimination, detachment and such – they all turn towards Consciousness/Spirit at the time of sadhana. And it is the assistance of the Light of Consciousness/Spirit's power that gives birth to discrimination [between sat and asat]. This is why it is described thusly: “The sadhana-supporting vrittis have been 'dressed' [for sadhana-battle] by Dhrishtadyumna or the Light of Consciousness/Spirit.”
 
At the end of sadhana, as perfection is attained, the state of samadhi and equipoise comes into being. At that time, the [power of the] Light of Consciousness/Spirit is no longer needed to keep discrimination and detachment [and such vrittis] alive. At that time, those [vrittis] merge/end [in Spirit] automatically and on their own, due to “karmaphala” [fruit of the act – in this case sadhana is the “act”]. That is what is called “the killing of Dhrishtadyumna by Ashvatthama.”
 
Historically, Dhrishtadyumna is the son of Drupada who emerged [fully grown] out of the sacrificial fire from the yajna [fire rite] being conducted [by Drupada] to bring forth a son who would kill Drona. But Drona was [practically] invincible. He had received a boon that unless the seven “talu[s]” [palates] were pierced, he could not be killed. That is why in the fifteenth day of the war of Kurukshetra, when Yudhishthira, acting on the advice of Sri Krishna, said to Dronacharya the words, “Ashvatthama is dead, meaning the elephant,” — Translators Note — In the Mahabharata, Ashvatthama is the name of Dronacharya's mighty warrior-son. Because of Drona's near-invincibility [see main text above], trickery is employed in order to kill him in the war of Kurukshetra. The killing of an elephant, also named “Ashvatthama,” is part of that plot. Drona never hears the last part of Yudhishthira's statement for reasons that are stated differently in different versions of the Mahabharata [one version says that the noise of the military music rises, as instructed by Sri Krishna, right after the first part of the sentence is said]. And, Drona, not understanding that it is an elephant that has been killed, believes that it is his son who has died as he only hears, “Ashvatthama is dead.” That is the cause of Drona's sitting down and weeping. The rest of the story is beyond the scope of this translation and can be found in the Maharabharata itself. — End Translator’s Note —  Dronacharya became overcome with emotion, and [sitting down cross-legged,] put his right foot on the left foot, and on top of that he stood his bow vertically where on the upper end [of the standing bow] he put his palms and then he put his chin on top of his palms, and in that position, he started weeping. The flow of tears streamed down the bowstring. Through the Maya of Sri Krishna, Arjuna thought that the stream of tears was a snake, and, acting on the advice of Sri Krishna, shot off an arrow in order to kill that snake. Because of that, the bowstring [of Drona's bow] was cut [by Arjuna's arrow] and [Drona's] bow sprung straight up. And because of this, the two feet, the two palms of the two hands, the chin, the palate in the mouth, and the Brahmatalu [a center in the head] – these seven “palates” became pierced [by the straightened bow]. At that time, Dhrishtadyumna took a scimitar and cut off Drona's head. Because of this act, the karmic result came in the form of Ashvatthama [the son of Drona and not the elephant], who, during his brutal and murderous attack [of the Pandavas' camp] in the night, killed Dhrishtadyumna while he was asleep.
