### Prose 
 --- 
असंयतात्मना योगो दुष्प्राप इति मे मति: |
वश्यात्मना तु यतता शक्योऽवाप्तुमुपायत: || 36||
asaṅyatātmanā yogo duṣhprāpa iti me matiḥ
vaśhyātmanā tu yatatā śhakyo ’vāptum upāyataḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The yoga of bringing the unruly mind under control is rare – I do agree. But the one who has brought the mind under control – if that person is sincere in practice, that person can be competent to attain yoga [union] through the appropriately instructed processes/means.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Practice and detachment are indeed the ways to concentrate the chitta [mind in general]. The one who cannot do that – for that person, yoga does not happen. If one is able to control or concentrate the mind, then one has the right to yoga. Then if one is sincere in practice, there is “shraddha” [reverence], “veerya” [strength], “smriti” [remembrance], “samadhi” [ecstatic equipoise], “pragya” [inner knowing] – through the sequences of these “upayas” [processes/means], yoga is attained. It is for this reason that the yoga of those who long for Liberation is “upayapratyaya” [with processes/means]. As soon as one's personal self is brought under control via pranayam and such, at first there is “shraddha” [reverence] – meaning: the devotion-filled mind becomes steady in Kutastha. It becomes “prasanna” [pleased] (or truly becomes tranquil). Then “veerya” [strength] comes about – meaning: the “I am the mind itself” knowledge becomes strong in the Energy of Brahman. At that time “smriti” [remembrance] arises – meaning: “It is I who am Brahman” - this Knowledge is remembered. It is through the help of this “smriti” that the mind becomes intoxicated and in that ecstasy, becomes Still in Equipoise. This is that which is “samadhi.” After this samadhi, “pragya” [inner knowingness] arises – meaning: the Self Itself is Realized. It is after this pragya that Chaitanya-Samadhi [Union with Spirit] is attained. It is from this Chaitanya-Samadhi that “Kaivalya” [Only-ness] or “Mukti” [Emancipation] comes. If, after doing sincere practice, the mind does not merge itself in those particular and sequential processes/means, then the state that is “like samadhi” that comes about – Kaivalya is not attained by that. That becomes “jada-samadhi” [physical samadhi] or the magician's magic trick. From that there is only the enjoyment of pleasure; thus one has to again return to samsara.