### Prose 
 --- 
कर्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन |
मा कर्मफलहेतुर्भूर्मा ते सङ्गोऽस्त्वकर्मणि || 47 ||
karmaṇy-evādhikāras te mā phaleṣhu kadāchana
mā karma-phala-hetur bhūr mā te saṅgo ’stvakarmaṇi

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
It is to the act that you have the right; may there not be any [right] to the outcome/s. Do not be the cause of the results of actions. And may you not be addicted to “akarma” [non-acting; or: wrong act [see commentary below for multiple definitions according to spiritual progress]].

### Commentary 
 --- 
Only Consciousness/Spirit can be spoken of as “I”. Otherwise, everything else is spoken of as “you.” For as long as the sadhak does not pierce Kutastha and attain Stillness, for that long does his/her pranic activity go on in that which is spoken of as “you” (“te” [see second line of sloka 47 above]) – meaning: prana goes on traveling from chakra to chakra. Thus, the sadhak [at that time] has the “right” - meaning: capability – over actions. But actions have fruits just by being actions. Just as in chemistry, different substances mix together and a new energetic property comes about through chemical interaction – in the same way, the mixing of mind and prana with the letter-formed “matrikas” [energetic properties] in the petals of the lotuses within the sushumna brings forth many types of miracles or powers. Those powers come to the sadhak as places of recourse [for him/her to take]. If the sadhak claims a right (holds) to those powers, then he/she becomes locked-up in “bhoga” [non-spiritual indulgence] and cannot progress any more. That is why the Lord is saying, “Do not ever claim a right to the outcomes of actions.” Not only that: “Do not be the cause of the results of actions” - meaning: that which brings about the results of actions, do not do that. When offering prana to every lotus [in the sushumna], if the connectedness moves from the vital-force and falls to the petals, then, because of that connection [to the petals], desire arises and brings about fruits. But if at that time the connectedness does not leave the prana, then there cannot be any rising up of desire. In [that type of] prana-offering [to the chakras], powers are only awakened [but] they do not rise up. Being “parsparaṃ bhAvayanta” [everything cooperating with one another], one attains “paraṃ shreyo” [the greatest] (see the commentary on the 11th sloka of Chapter 3 [of the Gita]). One does not have to be the cause of the fruits of actions. And He says even more, “Do not be associated with 'akarma' [non-acting; or: wrong act].” Moving prana within the brahmanadi from the Muladhar to the Ajna is verily “the act.” Before this act, there is “akarma,” and after it, there also “akarma.” Before this “act,” all of the works – except for the “tadarthiya” [spiritual] work – that are being carried out by the physical senses – all of that is “akarma” [wrong acts] – meaning: forbidden acts. Similarly, the action-less state that comes about after crossing the Ajna, when all acting is finished – that is also “akarma” [non-acting] – meaning: the state of non-doing. The first “akarma” is in the field of rajas-tamah; the second “akarma” takes place in the sattva-tamah field. If one becomes attached to the first “akarma,” one has to fall into an endless mire [of samsara]. If one becomes attached to the second “akarma” - meaning: doing Kriya with the desire to attain the state of non-doing, then “kashmal” comes to Kutastha [confused visions [see the commentary on sloka 2 of this Chapter 2]]. Thus, not being able to pierce that, one has to remain below. This is why, one has to perform the act (Kriya) without any associations – meaning: without attachment/addiction, and only thinking of it as dutiful work. Non-attachment/non-addiction brings about the peeling off; attachment-addiction keeps one sealed in. (See the next sloka.)