### Prose 
 --- 
धृतराष्ट्र उवाच |
धर्मक्षेत्रे कुरुक्षेत्रे समवेता युयुत्सवः |
मामकाः पाण्डवाश्चैव किमकुर्वत सञ्जय ||1||
dhṛitarāśhtra uvācha
dharma-kṣhetre kuru-kṣhetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ
māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāśhchaiva kimakurvata sañjaya

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
[The blind king] Dhritarashtra said, “O Sanjaya! After gathering with the intention of war, what did the two sides of my sons and the sons of Pandu do?”

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Dhritaṃrashtraṃ yena sah 'dhritarashtrah.'” [one who holds the kingdom is “Dhritarashtra”] The word “dhrita” [means/refers to]: “one who is holding.” “Rashtra” means “kingdom.” The one who is holding/presiding over the kingdom is “Dhritarashtra.” The one whose presence is spread throughout the kingdom in the form of this body – it he that is “Dhritrashtra” - meaning: “mind.” The mind does not have the ability [on its own] to take in or enjoy [or partake in] the experiences of sound and touch and such [sense experiences]. Eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin – all of the things that are experienced through these organs of perception – the mind experiences only that. This is why the mind is called “blind.” Dhritarashtra is blind as well. See the commentary in the 2nd and 21st slokas for the meaning of “Dhritarashtra said.”
 
“dharmakshetre kurukshetre”
 
The name of this body is “kshetra” [field]. Because of the particular and different activities of the three gunas, it [the body] is divided in three sections. The ten sense organs (meaning: eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin – these five sense-organs of perception; and speech, hands/arms, feet/legs, anus and the sex organ – these five sense-organs of action) make up its first section. The sushumna nadi that is nested in the spinal column – that sushumna and the six-chakras enjoined to it make up the second section. And the place of “ten fingers” [length] from the top of the Ajna-chakra to the Sahasrar [chakra] is [the body's] third section. In the first section, the functions of the external world are carried out. This [section] is rajas-tamas predominant. Because of the never-ending flow of action taking place in this section, it is called “Kurukshetra” or the field of work/action. The third section is sattva-tamas predominant. Here, there is the action-less Still-Light, and that is why it is called “Dharmakshetra” [the field of spirituality]. And the second section, the one that is the playground of “manas” [surface mind] and “buddhi” [intellect/intelligence], the place from where all of the subtle elements when turned outward activate the powers of the senses, and again, when turned inward, reveal the Light of the Self – that [place] of the sushumna – with the six chakras enjoined to it – is rajas-sattva predominant. Because this place is host to both dharma [spirituality] and karma [action], it is referred to [in the sloka] as “Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra” [field of spirituality, field of action]. Although this [particular] section of the “field” [body] is rajas-sattva predominant, there are variances in the proportions of the presence of the [different] gunas. The area that is close to the Muladhar [chakra] and belonging to Kurukshetra – there the amount of rajoguna is more and the amount of sattva-guna is less. In the same way, the area that is close to the Ajna [chakra] and belonging to Dharmakshetra – there the amount of sattva is more, and the amount of rajas is less. And in the middle of the entire distance from the Ajna to the bottom of the Muladhar – meaning: at the Manipur [chakra] – the amounts of these two (rajas [and] sattva) are the same [equal in proportion]. This is why this is the residing place of the “saman vayu” [air of equal-ness]. This is the “Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra” spoken about [in the sloka]. This is what is known as the “yogamarga” [“path” of yoga]. (See Illustration No. 3 [in the Introduction section].) At the lowermost point of this “path” in the Muladhar resides the desire- and enjoyment-attributed “Kulakundalini Shakti.” Lifting that Kulakundalini through this “path of yoga” through the use of particular techniques/practices, and thereby piercing the Ajna chakra — Begin Footnote. — The Ajna-chakra is filled with ignorance; thus another name for it is “Ajnana-chakra” [chakra of ignorance]. — End Footnote. — and taking [Her] to the Sahasrar and uniting Her with Supreme Shiva there is what is called “yoga.”

“mAmakAh pANDavah”
 
“Mamaka” [my kin] are “manovritti” [active aspects of the “manas” mind or ordinary mind], and “pandava” [of the family of Pandu] are “buddhivritti” [active aspects of “buddhi” - intellect or personal intelligence]. What this means is this: those [vrittis/active aspects] that reveal the real truth – those are aspects of intellect/intelligence. And those that think the reverse of that [real truth] are the aspects of mind. The reflection that is seen in the mirror when standing in front of it, at first it appears as if that is the real form of the body, but after analyzing it through intellect, one sees that that is not the real form of the body, [but that it is] a reversed image; meaning: - the right side of the body is now changed to the left side [in the reflection]. That is why sages have said, “vishvaṃ darpaNanagareetulyaṃ” [the universe is similar to a city [seen] in a mirror]. In that same way, the Knowledge of the Self and the delusion of the world [are like] the body and its reflection [respectively]; it is like “a necklace strung without a string” [a Bengali allegory]. Whatever the mind [manas] sees in front of it, it accepts it as truth, and it becomes magnetized to that very thing and acts either for or against it. Because of its primacy amongst the senses, and because it remains wrapped up in the matters taken in by the senses, the mind is always addicted to the matters of the world. This is because addiction/attachment comes about through association. “SangAt saṃjAyate kAmah” [being in the company [of a thing] brings about desire [for the thing]].  So, what I'm saying is this: the current within the antahkarana [inner operators] that ceaselessly flows in the direction of worldly matters – that is “manovritti” [vritti[s]/active aspect[s] of  mind]. This current flows in different kinds of waves, and according to the particular places and directions. Each wave is a “vritti” [particular active aspect] of the mind. Therefore, manovritti [vrittis of mind] are many. The many different expressions of the world-directed currents of manovritti – these are “mamaka” [my kin], meaning: the aggregate of desires. These are the “one hundred sons” of Dhritarashtra – the mind, [and] the “one hundred brothers” including Duryodhana and such. It is they that are known as “pravritti” (meaning: - the vrittis [active aspects] that go towards samsara, or the aggregate of undutiful/non-productive things), such as: lust, anger, greed, delusion, pride, miserliness, [excessive] sleep, drowsiness, laziness, infatuation, repulsion, affection, possessive love etc.
 
Whatever the buddhi [intellect/intelligence] sees in front of it, it makes itself certain of [the thing] – meaning: measures it. The Self is [the buddhi's] yardstick. The result of this measuring shows that things are divided into two categories. One is “Sat” [Truth or Reality – in this case: belonging to Truth] – that which is eternal and unlimited (even though “tadarthiya karma” [action to get to Truth] is limited, it belongs in this category because it takes one to “Sat”), and the other is “asat” - that which is temporal and limited. Separating the Sat and asat by comparing each to the Self is that which is called “vastuvichar” [the analysis of things]. As the Self is the yardstick in this vastuvichar, the “buddhivritti” [active aspects of intelligence] flow extremely subtly, yet ceaselessly, towards the Self. This is the second current of the antahkarana. This also manifests as different kinds of waves according to the various types of things. The different expressions of this current directed towards the Self are what [together] is called “pandavah” [those belonging to Pandu] (“pandu iti jnAne” [“pandu” means “in wisdom”]) - meaning: the group of dutiful/worthy aspects. These are known as “nivritti” (meaning: the active aspects that are non-samsaric [or: those aspects that turn away from samsara]) – for example: discrimination [between sat and asat], discernment/enquiry/analysis, detachment/non-attachment, serenity, self-control, endurance, satiety, reverence, resolve, intense spiritual longing/focus etc.
 
In the antahkarana, these two currents [manovritti and buddhivritti] are always active. Because of this, as different things/events come into contact [with the person], either one or the other [current], or both mixed, become alternatively powerful; neither stays permanently. But, just as in the science of electricity, when ends of two wires of two opposite currents are connected together, one of the two currents is overcome [by the other] and the other [stronger current] expands greatly and flows in an unending and powerful flow, similarly, if by some way with some technique (a technique that has to be learned from guru's teachings) these two vrittis are connected together, then one vritti (directed towards worldly things) is overcome [by the other vritti] and the other vritti (directed towards the Self) becomes more powerful and flows ceaselessly towards the Self. It is this that is called “yuktavastha” [the state of being connected] or “karmavastha” [the state of the act] while abiding in yoga. If one remains in this state, a movement upward happens which upends the dimensions of time named “past” and “future” and only the “present” stays in awareness. Thus, it is possible for one to be knowledgeable about the three dimensions of time [past, present and future]. This is the first step of intense nivritti.
 
“samavetA yuyutsavah”
 
“Dharmakshetra-Kurukshetra” is “yogamarga” [the “path” of yoga]. If one wants to make [spiritual] war, there has to be [a] “samaveta” (coming together) in this place; meaning: in order for the sadhak to take the delusion of samsara and extinguish it in Self-Knowledge, [the warrior/s] have to come to this place. Just after getting here, the sadhak comes to see that a group of samskaras [tendencies] that are bunched together are attacking him/her, one after another; they are destroying his focus and throwing his attention off somewhere far away. And then again, [he/she sees] that there are some samskaras that are bringing forth steadfastness, enthusiasm and such in his mind/heart, and again bringing the focus back on his/her goal/aim. The first group of samskaras is for associating with worldly things, and the second group is for associating with Sat [spirituality]. It is when the mind becomes deviated that it becomes addicted to worldly matters; and it is [when the mind] becomes acutely observant that it becomes capable of attaining the spiritual things. Therefore, the first group [of samskaras] are the result of “manasik vikar” [deviations of the mind], and for this reason – [there is the statement] “mamakah” [those belonging to me], and the second group [of samskaras] is [the result of] “manasik vichar” [discerning by the mind] (“vi” = “vigata” [gone beyond], “char” = “chala phela” [moving]) – meaning: [those samskaras] are the result of knowledge. It is a state that is like this: it comes about after abandoning resolve and doubt, yet [at the same time] the activities of intellect are [still] in the process of enquiry as well as getting answers, but no real resolution is being established – this kind of state is the state of “manasik vichar.”
 
During the performance of guru-initiated Kriya, the mind [in the broader sense of the word] takes up the subtle nature and thereafter gains breadth. At that time, its contracted state gets destroyed, and therefore, the good and bad samskaras of this and previous lives begin to present themselves. Because [one] is wrapped up in latent desires of worldly matters, the worldly samskaras are much stronger than the samskaras towards Sat. This is why, at first, [those worldly samskaras] destroy his focus and bind up [the sadhak]. But, because of the guru-initiated samskara being ever-awake (Kutastha Chaitanya or Sri Krishna) – through Its Light, the samskaras towards Sat again reappear and make [the sadhak] regain his/her focus towards [the practice]. (This “vishaya-samskara” [samskara towards the world] is “pravritti” [outer-oriented] and “Sat-samskara” is “nivritti” [inner- or Spirit-oriented].) Just as a piece of wood that has been thrown on a river, even though it gets thrown about by both flow and ebb tides because of being under their power, in the end it inevitably ends up in the huge ocean and the tidal currents cannot keep it blocked from going forward – in that same way, if [the sadhak] continuously practices Kriya according to guru's instructions, no matter how powerful the pravritti group is, in the end, for certain and regardless of anything, [the practice] brings [the sadhak] to that Great Ocean of Peace (to the Brahman-Substance). The true-hearted, earnestly endeavoring sadhak is aware of these aspects that thwart and support [manovritti and buddhivritti, respectively]. Because this [activity] appears right before the start of Kriya, it has been said, “If one desires to make war, these [aspects] come together.”
 
“kim kurvata sanjaya”
 
  On the tenth day of the war [in the Mahabharata], Bhishma fell, and when Sanjaya returned from the field of battle to Hastina (to the karmakshetra, where Dhritarashtra, or the mind, resides) to report the news of Bhishma's death, Dhritarashtra began to ask Sanjaya about the war. In the process of describing the war, Sanjaya elucidated the Srikrishnarjunasamvad [dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna] (Gita) to him. The meaning of this is: after crossing the ten-petaled lotus at the Manipur [chakra], when the prana-vayu enters the chitra [nadi], the Kulakundalini [Shakti] awakens. Then the sadhak's body consciousness goes away and the world-oriented “I-ness” - meaning: “chidabhas” [reflected consciousness] or “asmita” [egoism] (that which is spread throughout the ten directions and is continuously protesting against the spirit-hood of the soul/jiva) – becomes powerless. That is what is represented by “the fall of Bhishma.” Upon awakening the Kulakundalini, illuminated by the Tranquil Light of the Self, an internal Eye appears. It is through this [Eye] that collective events of the three dimensions of time [past, present and future] become visible. Later, because of the force of “vikarma” [the trigger to take action], when the sadhak again has to return to the field of action, then, even though he/she has had the direct experience of the Light of the Self, because of still being wrapped up in worldly matters, and as memory is awake, the matters/events that take place from beginning to end in “Dharmakshetra Kurukshetra” begin to, and continue to, appear as shadows in his/her consciousness. Then [the sadhak] goes on to question and enquire about those matters/events. And those enquiries (upon practicing guru-instructed Kriya) become “mimamsita” [resolved by knowing] (directly and experientially). It is this that is expressed in the Gita as the dialogue between Dhritarashtra and Sanjaya. The sadhak's [ordinary] state of consciousness in the waking state is called “Dhritarashtra,” and [the sadhak's] Kriya-attained “manasdrishti” [vision of the inner mind], “antadrishti” [inner vision] or “divyadrishti” [divine sight] is called “Sanjaya.”
 
At the commencement of the performance of Kriya, all of the things that happen/ed, because of pravritti's thwarting and nivritti's endeavoring, until the destruction of the “chidabhas” [reflected consciousness] – remembering those things in detail, or going through them in the mind, is the sadhak's intention. “What did I do after this,” “what did I do after that” - when one thinks and remembers self-created things of the past, these types of questions that rise in the mind – these [questions asked at the beginning of Kriya] are also simple questions like those. Thus: why Dhritarashtra asked Sanjaya questions – there is no reason to have any confusion/doubt about that matter.
