### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वद्वारेषु देहेऽस्मिन्प्रकाश उपजायते |
ज्ञानं यदा तदा विद्याद्विवृद्धं सत्त्वमित्युत || 11||
sarva-dvāreṣhu dehe ’smin prakāśha upajāyate
jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād vivṛiddhaṁ sattvam ity uta

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
When consciousness manifests in all of the doors of this body – know that it is at that time that sattva guna is present and active.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The ten [primary] organs have ten operations, but the worldly experience is of five types. Enjoying/partaking again and again, no contentment is coming forth from any of these [five]. The more one enjoys/partakes, the more the lust for enjoyment and partaking grows. If enjoyment/partaking goes on like this, then even millions of brahmakalpas [enormous epochs] do not bring about the quelling of the lust for enjoyment/partaking; it just goes on growing and growing. It is not possible to end the coming and going [the cycle of birth and death] like this. Therefore, without extreme withdrawal from all of these things, there is no other way of being delivered from the hands of death.

The work of the organs of perception is to grasp. The work of the organs of action is to let go. And for as long as they remain, they will do these works. What I enjoy the first time, no matter how many times I enjoy that again, there is no newness in that enjoyment at any other time like the first time. So what is the use of spending time with that stale enjoyment? When this knowledge takes over in the heart fully, know that that is the establishment of sattva guna. The word “sarvadvara” [all doors; or: doors of all] means the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness].