### Prose 
 --- 
यामिमां पुष्पितां वाचं प्रवदन्त्यविपश्चित: |
वेदवादरता: पार्थ नान्यदस्तीति वादिन: || 42||
yāmimāṁ puṣhpitāṁ vāchaṁ pravadanty-avipaśhchitaḥ
veda-vāda-ratāḥ pārtha nānyad astīti vādinaḥ

कामात्मान: स्वर्गपरा जन्मकर्मफलप्रदाम् |
क्रियाविशेषबहुलां भोगैश्वर्यगतिं प्रति || 43||
kāmātmānaḥ swarga-parā janma-karma-phala-pradām
kriyā-viśheṣha-bahulāṁ bhogaiśhwarya-gatiṁ prati

भोगैश्वर्यप्रसक्तानां तयापहृतचेतसाम् |
व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धि: समाधौ न विधीयते || 44||
bhogaiśwvarya-prasaktānāṁ tayāpahṛita-chetasām
vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ samādhau na vidhīyate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Partha [Arjuna]! All of those “avipashchit” [ignorant ones] – undiscriminating, desirous souls, bound to the [desires] for heavenly pleasures who are engaged in the rites as stated in the Vedas, taking up the conviction of “there is nothing else [other than heaven as the highest]” - all of these enchanting things that they say in the performance of the many rites in order to obtain riches for enjoyment – because their hearts are stolen away [by such words] and because of their becoming addicted to the enjoyment of riches, their intellects cannot have stability in samadhi.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Vipashchit” [wise] (“vi” + “pra” = viprakrishta [remote] + “cha” = to gather + “ka”): one who gathers together “viprakrishta” - meaning: things that are “duravarta” [at a far distance or long way off]. How many kinds of “dur” [distances] are there? Space-related, time-related, and attainment/objective-related – these are the three types of distances. The space-related things that are far away can be gathered in (completely had) by the hands and feet [etc.] - meaning: via physical actions. The time-related things that are far away can be collected through logical inferences of past and future [and such] and through analysis – meaning: through the actions of the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness]. And the attainment/objective-related things that are far away can be collected in (completely had) by “anubhava” - meaning: that can be had by becoming more and more “anu” [atomic], after passing the chitta-dharma – meaning: after the dissolving of everything in the practice of Layayoga [the yoga of dissolution], where the vrittis of the antahkarana are dissolved and the self merges into the Self. The one who takes these three – body, mind and soul – and makes them one, and is thereby able to obtain the “far away” [objective of] “Naad-Bindu” (existing beyond the six chakras) completely – meaning: he/she can merge into that or can try to merge into that – that person is “vipashchit” [wise]. But one who does not obtain that far away objective via Kriyayoga, or does not try to obtain it, and goes on collecting the “nearby things” instead – meaning: the visible worldly things within the five chakras – that person is “avipashchit” [ignorant]. Thus, the desire-bound person is “avipashchit” - meaning: undiscriminating. The undiscriminating ones, bound by the power of wanting, aim for heaven – the highest level of sense-pleasure-enjoyment. The highest fruit of desire-fulfilling rites is heaven. In the “karmakanda” [section on rites] of the Vedas, this is the proviso that has been given. Those people [the “avipashchit”] take up that stated provision in the Vedas and say, “Attaining heaven is the highest fruit; there is nothing besides that”; they say all kinds of nicely put together, enchanting things. Doing such things results in this: they lose their sensibilities, become ignorant of the differences between the Eternal and the temporal, and go on being ever-engrossed in enjoyments and opulence. They are not able to have consciousness stabilized in union in samadhi. Why they cannot – that matter will be clearly stated [in the next paragraph].
 
Karma [action] is of two types - “sakama” [with desire] and “nishkama” [without desire]. These happen externally via the physical body and internally via the subtle body. Because of this, there is a limit in the carrying out of action. Just as, in the external, the body becomes tired and unable to move after excessive labor and no more work can be done, one has to stop trying – in the same way, in the internal, when action reaches a very intense state, it ends and a state of stillness comes about. That state of stillness is called “samadhi.” Thus, this samadhi is the inevitable result of Kriya. But because of the desirous and desirelessness versions of action [see first sentence of this paragraph], samadhi is of two types. When one becomes “extinguished” in desirous action, one has to carry on the memory-samskaras of the desired things through [and after] the extinguishing. Right after samadhi breaks [finishes] – that memory awakens again immediately upon returning to the waking state. This is called, “jada-samadhi” [samadhi of the body]. In this, glorious experiences and revelations are had, [but] there is absolutely no Liberation. [On the other hand,] when desireless actions end, because of the absence of desire, only Consciousness/Spirit remains the focus, and one becomes merged in that Consciousness/Spirit Itself. When this state [of samadhi] goes away, nothing is thought about in the mind. There is a kind of “I don't know what but I was in quite a wonderful way” experience where the antahkarana remains intoxicated in a Bliss-Nectar. This is called “Chaitanya-Samadhi” [Samadhi of Spirit] or “Brahmisthiti” [abidance in the Supreme]. Right before this “Chaitanya-Samadhi,” the intellect becomes “vyavasayatmika” [stable; certain]. That is why it is written that even if the addicted [to samsara] attain samadhi, their intellects do not become stable in it.
