### Prose 
 --- 
चातुर्वर्ण्यं मया सृष्टं गुणकर्मविभागश: |
तस्य कर्तारमपि मां विद्ध्यकर्तारमव्ययम् || 13||
chātur-varṇyaṁ mayā sṛiṣhṭaṁ guṇa-karma-vibhāgaśhaḥ
tasya kartāram api māṁ viddhyakartāram avyayam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I have created the four “varnas” [levels of spiritual attainment; ordinary meaning: castes] according to the gunas [essential and primal qualities] and differences in karmas [general activities; vocations]. Even though I am their “karta” [Creator], know Me to be “akarta” [Non-doer] and “avyaya” [Inexhaustible]. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
Yes, it is true that siddhi or the attainment of the state of acting with no desire happens quickly in the “manush loka” [see commentary in sloka 4:12], but power is not attained. This is because there are differences in the rights, due to the differences in the “varnas” [levels of spiritual attainment]. Brahmin, kshatriya, vaishya, shudra – these are the four varnas. These have been divided according to the distribution of the karmas [types of potential actions] which are endowed with sattva, rajah [variants: raja; rajas; rajo], tamah [variants: tama; tamas; tamo] – these three gunas. The karma of sattva is to reveal/know. The karma of rajas is to make action. The karma of tamas is to make still. These three gunas do not always remain in the same state [or: in equal proportion of presence or activity] in the body. The changes of states that occur in the mind according to the differences in worldly experiences – the gunas' proportions/activities become greater or lesser due to that. In the sattva-dominated state in the body, the inner space becomes completely filled with Pure Light; whatever there is in the universe is revealed in that Light in a serene and settled way. This universe-revealing varna is the brahmin-varna. When sattva-rajah is predominant in the body, the inner space is colored with a light red color. Whatever is reflected [within] at that time – those are all full of movement and filled with energy. This energy- and movement-filled varna is the kshatriya-varna. When the state in the body is rajas-tamah predominant, the inner space is colored by a darkish-red color. At this time no reflection at all is seen [within]. What happens [within] – all of that is vague, hazy, unclear – and, on top of that, full of restlessness. This is the vaishya-varna. And in the state when tamah is predominant, the inner space is covered with deep darkness. At that time [in the spiritual perception], neither is there movement , nor revelation; nothing at all is seen; nothing is apprehended either. This is the shudra-varna. The state before sadhana is the sadhak's shudra-varna. For as many days as this state is present, for that many days there is only the blind taking care of, or serving, the body. Besides [having the right to] the experiences of the external matters, there is no right to anything at all in the inner world. Later, when one has begun to do sadhana and can offer, and get, prana from one place to another, at that time, because of the nerves and pathways of the spine becoming gradually free of denseness, a pleasant lightness begins to manifest itself. And a power begins to grow within, by which, the darkness goes on being gradually dispelled. There is a feeling that “something or other is there inside”; and the vibrations increase within and outside the body. For as many days as this state is present for the sadhak, for that many days it is the sadhak's vaishya-varna. Later, when the breath becomes subtle and a whitish-red luminous light illuminates the inner [space], at that time there is the spreading of an energy within the body and mind. By the power of that energy, the pains/difficulties of sadhana become trivial. As prana is brought up and down by will – that brings about the shining forth of the different locations of all of the chakras, and they become visible. And the various supernatural aspects or powers of each of those locations come well under the control [of the sadhak]. This state is the sadhak's kshatriya-varna. Finally, at the time of the ripening of this state, as the restlessness of rajoguna and its energetic power diminish and the redness within goes away, and the bright whiteness manifests, then the body and mind become peaceful, free of anxiety, and happy. This state is the sadhak's brahmin-varna. Having obtained the right to having the fundamental Knowledge of Pranava, if one wants to attain Brahma-bala [the power of Brahman] after completely understanding the Knowledge of Brahman, the sadhak has to become “dvija” [twice-born] by the performance of the satguru-given Kriya, go through the progression of the vaishya, kshatriya, brahmin varnas and come to the final end of the path of the sadhana. Otherwise, it [the attaining of “Brahma-bala”] does not happen through anything else at all. That is why different injunctions, according to differences in the rights of the different varnas, are stated in the scriptures. “Brahma-bala” is a supernatural power – meaning: a special power of the highest order. That is why, unless one becomes a brahmin, there is no way to attain that. However, the [attainment of the] Supreme Destination and Liberation are not based on power, but based on the state of being. Therefore, there is no exclusion due to rightfulness for anyone when it comes to these [Supreme Attainments]. Whoever makes the effort to investigate into the Self upon taking up the mantra of the Deity in a devoted way, that very person – what to say of brahmins and kshatriyas, “striyovaishyastathA shudrah” - women, vaishyas, shudras – no matter what varna or what race – one will definitely have deliverance – meaning: one will have “Kaivalya-Shanti” [the Peace of Only-ness]. The only recourse is progressing according to guru's teachings and injunctions in the “manush-loka” in the path of sadhana. Those four varnas that have come about according to the divisions of the karmas of the three gunas – those are singularly the work of the “I”, verily. This is because: as “I” and “I-ness” are two different states (an erroneous perception) – just as there is really no difference between them, similarly, Pure Consciousness and impure consciousness, although they are seen in that way [as different], are actually not different. Although Consciousness is Eternal, Pure Awareness and Non-doing, Its Own “Other-ness” - meaning: Maya – it is by that, verily, that He has become impure, and through gradual progression has dressed Himself up to manifest from the dense to the densest. And He has brought about the four varnas according to the different mixtures of the three gunas.