### Prose 
 --- 
प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव विद्ध्यनादी उभावपि |
विकारांश्च गुणांश्चैव विद्धि प्रकृतिसम्भवान् || 20||
prakṛitiṁ puruṣhaṁ chaiva viddhy anādī ubhāv api
vikārānśh cha guṇānśh chaiva viddhi prakṛiti-sambhavān

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Know that both Prakriti and Purush are beginning-less. Know that all permutations and gunas [qualities] manifest from Prakriti.

### Commentary 
 --- 
[In the seventh chapter [of the Bhagavad Gita], the matter of two Prakritis by the names of “apara” and “Para,” which represent the Lord’s “field and knower of the field” [respectively], have been stated. At that time, it was said that all phenomena and living beings are born of this dual Prakriti. How all phenomena and living beings arise from that dual Prakriti –  signifying the field and the knower of the field – in order to explain that, the Lord is now describing the signs and such of Prakriti and Purush.]
Now the sadhak is enquiring into Prakriti and Purush. “Prakriti”: “pra” = “prakrishta” [most excellent] one who does “kriti” [manifestations]. Therefore, it is now determined that the one who acts is called “Prakriti.” “Purush” is the name of the one who is laying down in the “abode” [or: is completely laying down]. Both of these are “anadi” [beginning-less] (those who have not had birth until even now). “Na [negation] adi [beginning]” = “anadi” [without beginning]. If the meaning of the word “Brahman” is analyzed, [it means:] with the root “briha” = expanse, the great; and “man” means “without limit.” The meaning of the word “Brahman” is “the Great Infinity.” For as far as the rulership of this Great Infinity is, for that far there is no place for anything else; only Brahman is Present. Whatever I can see in the visible world, there is a name for that, a form for that as well. And there are also statements which refer to things that cannot be found, like: “flower in the sky,” “horse’s egg,”  “barren woman’s son,” “camel’s horn” etc. While being under the rulership of the word Brahman, if one wants to understand Maya, Prakriti, and Purush, one should think of them as if they are like those words which refer to nothing that actually exists, like aberrations of imagination or falsehoods. Although those imaginary words/statements have no reality – just as those functions that accompany their meanings are [nevertheless] there, it is the same for the meanings of these words: Maya, Prakriti, Purush. That is why, in order to totally free the jivas [souls] from their suffering, the great sages have said in spiritual teachings (Vedanta philosophy) that only Brahman is True, other than That, everything else – Maya, Prakriti, Purush – is false. When the word “Satya” [Truth] appears, just as, right with that [utterance] (even it is not there), the understanding of an opposing word “mithya” [false] comes about – it is like that with the words Maya-Prakriti-Purush [being false] in the “Satya Brahman” [Brahman-Reality]. Brahman is the Eternal Reality, without mutations. And Maya is impermanent, unreal, and nothing but mutations. Brahman and Maya, like body and shadow – one does not stay without the other. This Maya is inert, non-substantial; and Brahman is Awareness/Consciousness Substance Itself. Through their intense relationship, there comes about a delusional understanding of the non-substantial being substantial (like the reflection of the body in the mirror). It is verily then that Maya dresses up as Brahman – meaning: gives forth the idea that [Maya is] the Real and mutation-less. This inverse dressing-up by Maya – this indeed is “Prakriti.” When this Prakriti became big – it is then that She swallowed Brahman in Her belly, like the sky [being reflected] in the pond, or making a house with covered roof in the great space. Covered roof – the floor is “pur” [abode], and the void within the abyss of that “pur” is “Purush.” Just as the salt-water of the sea, taking on the qualities of fire, air and space, and abandoning its own qualities of saltiness, comes down as pure, satisfying and life-giving substance for the world of beings – similarly, due to residing with the extremely low-level and small [types of] natures, Purush also takes on the name of “jiva” [individual person], and, losing all sensibility, dresses up and sits as Prakriti. That is why this one is called “Para Prakriti.” That is because, although this being is “non-doing,” due to the wrong influence of the company it keeps, it takes on the ill-repute of a vain enjoyer (even if it does not actually take it on). “SaṃsargajA doshaguNA bhavanti” [the wrongness of qualities is born of association]. Therefore, Prakriti and Purush are both beginning-less. And know that all imaginations of mutations and qualities are in Prakriti itself. 