### Prose 
 --- 
तानहं द्विषत: क्रूरान्संसारेषु नराधमान् |
क्षिपाम्यजस्रमशुभानासुरीष्वेव योनिषु || 19||
tān ahaṁ dviṣhataḥ krūrān sansāreṣhu narādhamān
kṣhipāmy ajasram aśhubhān āsurīṣhv eva yoniṣhu

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I always place those cruel, wrongful, lowest of humans who hate Me into asuric wombs in samsara. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Aham” = Kutastha Chaitanya or Akshara Purush. This “aham” [“I”] is the knower of all fields. It is the same in everything. It hates no one, nor has anyone who is dear (Chapter 9, sloka [no sloka reference after the word “sloka” in the original]). It is the one who metes out the fruits of karma. Whatever the action of whoever is – It bestows the fruits according to that [action]. There is not a hair-breadth of exception. It is “sarvasA hṛdi saṃniviShTah” [resides in the hearts of all]. It is from It that memory, knowledge [arise] and both dissolve [in It] (Chapter 15, sloka 15 [of the Bhagavad Gita]). And It is the One Who, in the form of the All-ruling God, makes the jiva, [individual] who is locked in his/her habitual actions, carry out such actions (Chapter 18, slokas 60 and 61 [of the Bhagavad Gita]). Whatever action that the jiva starts – the mind is engaged in that action according to the obtained fruits of previous actions, bringing about good and bad fruits [in this act]. Similarly, at the time of death, in order to continue according to the karma [actions and their fruits] of that jiva, [the “aham”] makes the jiva remember the states according to that [habitual actions]. Whatever the state is that the jiva remembers at the time of death – that is the state that it later attains [after death]. If the State of the Self is remembered at the time of death, one becomes free of the rulership of Prakriti. Otherwise, one goes back and forth in the current of birth and death in the abyss of Prakriti. Meting out the fruits of actions in this way is the work of the Inner-residing God.

Now the thing is that the asura-natured people, being filled with the “I am the body idea,” become soul-haters, cruel and evil-doers. Thus, at the time of death, the Lord makes them remember the “body-state.” For this reason, they again have to take up a body in the birth-death-enjoined path of samsara. And again they become soul-haters, cruel and evil-doers. As this happens again and again, they gradually go lower and lower. They, being of horrifying, soul-hating natures, they gradually [descend] from human [incarnations] to wombs of tigers, snakes and such various asuric wombs. In this way, they experience the fruits of their own actions. 