### Prose 
 --- 
नात्यश्नतस्तु योगोऽस्ति न चैकान्तमनश्नत: |
न चाति स्वप्नशीलस्य जाग्रतो नैव चार्जुन || 16||
nātyaśhnatastu yogo ’sti na chaikāntam anaśhnataḥ
na chāti-svapna-śhīlasya jāgrato naiva chārjuna

युक्ताहारविहारस्य युक्तचेष्टस्य कर्मसु |
युक्तस्वप्नावबोधस्य योगो भवति दु:खहा || 17||
yuktāhāra-vihārasya yukta-cheṣhṭasya karmasu
yukta-svapnāvabodhasya yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
But Arjuna, yoga does not happen for the one who eats too much; it does not happen if there is no eating either. Similarly, it does not happen for one who sleeps too much, and (yoga) does not happen if one stays awake all the time.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Eating too much or not eating at all – both are forbidden for the yogi. Regularity of eating/diet is his/her discipline. According to the [instructions on the] sattvic diet [stated] in Chapter 17, sloka 8 [of the Gita]: it is only when that [correct food] is taken in an appropriate amount that the diet becomes regulated. There should be solid food in half of the stomach; one-fourth part of the stomach should be filled with [healthy] drinkable substance, and the final fourth part should be left empty for the movement of air; this is called “mitahar” [literal meaning: eating that is friendly to the body; usual meaning: moderate or regulated diet]. — Begin Footnote. — “mitAhAraṃ vina yastu yogarambhaṃ tu kArayet; nAnArogo bhavettasya kinchit yogo na siddhyati” [one who starts [or: practices] yoga without having moderation in diet incurs many diseases, and does not obtain success]. — End Footnote. — The kind of moving about that keeps the body strong and supple for the use of the whole body, yet tiredness does not come about – that is regulated activity. Performing Kriya (sadhana) a little bit now, then another little bit – this kind of routine does not bring about realization. A strict routine is necessary. This means: at which time and for how long Kriya should be done – first there has to be a commitment to this. It is when there is no deviating from this [routine] that one is “yuktachesta” [making effort for union]. Similarly, sleeping and waking also have to be regulated. This is because if one sleeps too much, the body becomes lethargic and the paths of the vital-air become phlegmatic and cause troubles in the performance of yoga. Similarly, if there is no sleep at all, the body becomes tired and bound to many kinds of unsettledness, and yoga does not happen at all. For the yogic practitioner, sleeping for the duration of one “prahar” [4 hours] is enough. In the beginning of  practice time of yoga, one has to have quite a good sleep at night. Then, one should get up, cleanse oneself, including evacuation of bowels and urine etc., become clean by washing the hands, mouth and face, and then sit in asana and perform Kriya. Later, after some progress in the path of yoga, one can take up that [needed] sleep right after the midday meal, and then one can practice yoga for the entire time of the night. Yet again, it should not be like the following either: having slept in a regulated way, one practices yoga day and night. This will not work. One also has to stay in the waking state in a normal way as well. All of these are external disciplines. Just as one has to adhere to the strict disciplines of eating, activity and resting in the external, there are also similar rules for the internal world during the practice of Kriya. That is being stated here. Taking something through the throat and settling it in the stomach for the sake of the sustenance of the body is called “ahar” [eating; diet]. At the time of Kriya, only vital-air is “ahar” [food; diet]. If the consumption of that vital-air is too much or not at all, yoga does not happen – meaning: at the time of inhalation the air is drawn with great force, the body quivers – if it is like this, yoga will not happen; “roga” [illness] will happen. Similarly, attempting to totally stop breathing by neither inhaling nor exhaling will also bring about “roga.” The inhalation and exhalation that goes on easily/naturally and automatically – one has to apply the technique on that itself, as taught by guru. It is only then that yoga happens. This is “yuktahar” [eating/consuming for union]. And performing the Kriya of this breath in the right time and in the right way – meaning: not making the breath sometimes short, sometimes long, sometimes fine and sometimes dense, but lifting and dropping it in the same form via the use of the mantra – that is when there is “yuktavihar” [relaxed activity for union], and that is when one is “yuktachesta” [making effort for union]. Now, what is “dreaming” and “being awake”? That is being explained. In the ordinary state of being, whatever kinds of states we experience in the day and night – all of that is considered “dream” by the yogic scriptures – meaning: the worldly experience that one joins with upon letting go of contemplation of the Self or contemplation of God – that is “dream.” And going to the height of sadhana, entering the Abode in the innermost part of being, the state in which one can experience the impermanence and non-existence of samsara, and have the direct realization of the Eternal Bliss-ness of the Self – that is “being awake” or the “time of Awareness.” If one stays for too long in the “dream-state” – meaning: the intercourse with the worldly experience – the mind becomes addicted to that and cannot enter within. Similarly, the “awake-state” (not samadhi) that one experiences during the performance of yoga, if at first one tries to stay in that for a long time (well, one cannot stay in that anyway; because of the errors of habit, one has to fall from that; but still, if one tries to keep that state by doing continuous Kriya sitting in the same posture), the strength of the body diminishes; the body can be taken over by illnesses. For this reason, in the beginning, one has to perform yoga for a restricted way and at the right time. Later, according to how the practice becomes stronger and deeper (if one follows the directives of spiritual desire, the practice becomes stronger and deeper quite quickly) – according to the progress, the time of settledness experienced during Kriya automatically grows. Then no fear of any troubles remains. If one relies on the teachings of guru, and practices by following these [aforementioned] methods with great caution and with great care, one attains samadhi. All sorrows are destroyed as well. 