### Prose 
 --- 
न च मत्स्थानि भूतानि पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम् |
भूतभृन्न च भूतस्थो ममात्मा भूतभावन: || 5||
na cha mat-sthāni bhūtāni paśhya me yogam aiśhwaram
bhūta-bhṛin na cha bhūta-stho mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Behold My “aishvarik yoga” [see commentary for definition and explanation] (Glory). There is no phenomena in Me. I, although the Holder and Director of phenomena, am also not within all of the phenomena.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Behold now My “yogaishvarya” [definition and explanation follow]. “Yoga” is the union of one thing with another thing. And “aishvarya” is the name given to the rulership of one entity over another entity. Look at just the junction, the place where Prakriti, or Maya, comes together with “I”. Prakriti is the Queen of phenomena, and I Am without any qualifications. I AM “I” Itself. The place where there is the joining of Me with Prakriti – at that junction, Prakriti is leaning on Me and becoming intoxicated. But the “I” has nothing to do with being or not being anything. Therefore, My Lordship over Prakriti is happening automatically. This activity due to enjoining is happening in such an unseen and automatic way that Prakriti Herself is not able to understand whether it is happening by Her power or the Power of the “I”. That is why the statement “na cha matsthAni bhootAni” [nor are the phenomena in Me; see first line of above sloka]. There is none who is closer to Me than Prakriti, that is why I am “bhutabhrit” – meaning: even while being the Sustainer of phenomena, I am not “in” phenomena. This is because My Infinity is spread out as the pervasive and non-pervasive Void. All that is finite has found residence within this Infinity from the beginning – there is nothing that is needed to be made anew (stating: all is false). Thus, I am the Lord of the creation of phenomena. The one in whose womb someone is born – that one is the mother of the one who is born. In the same way, the Mother of the finite is the Infinite.