### Prose 
 --- 
न तु मां शक्यसे द्रष्टुमनेनैव स्वचक्षुषा |
दिव्यं ददामि ते चक्षु: पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम् || 8||
na tu māṁ śhakyase draṣhṭum anenaiva sva-chakṣhuṣhā
divyaṁ dadāmi te chakṣhuḥ paśhya me yogam aiśhwaram

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
But you will not be able see Me by just these [physical] eyes of yours. (Therefore,) I am bestowing the Divine Eye to you. Behold My extraordinary Yogic Power.

### Commentary 
 --- 
These two [physical] eyes of yours – with these you can [only] see the things of the outer world (Prakritic material things). You will not be able to see “I”. The Yoga of “I” (meaning: how Maya becomes One with “I”, how Maya emerges, how Maya plays) – if that is to be seen, then that cannot be seen by the sight of those two eyes. Now I am bestowing upon you an Eye that is like Space (see the commentary to sloka 3 of Chapter 8 [of the Pranab Gita]), by which, you will be able to see My Yoga and Glories. Behold. — Begin Footnote. — Although all of the teaching that takes place at initiation is given in Chapter 8 [of the Gita], the action of the opening of the Eye of Knowledge is actually happening here [in sloka 11:8]. This is because: the fruit of initiation – the ability to see within – actually begins here [at this stage of the sadhak]. It is because of this fruit of initiation coming about that one prostrates to gurudeva by saying this statement: “chakshuranmeelitaṃ yena tasmai sriguruve namah” [the one by whom the eye is opened – to that divine guru do I prostrate]. — End Footnote. —