### Prose 
 --- 
अमी हि त्वां सुरसङ्घा विशन्ति
केचिद्भीता: प्राञ्जलयो गृणन्ति |
स्वस्तीत्युक्त्वा महर्षिसिद्धसङ्घा:
स्तुवन्ति त्वां स्तुतिभि: पुष्कलाभि: || 21||
amī hi tvāṁ sura-saṅghā viśhanti
kechid bhītāḥ prāñjalayo gṛiṇanti
svastīty uktvā maharṣhi-siddha-saṅghāḥ
stuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ puṣhkalābhiḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
All of the divine beings are entering You (surrendering). Some are trepidatiously praying with joined palms (saying from afar: “save us; save us”). The great sages and perfected beings are saying “svasti” [glory to You], and are singing hymns, extolling You with words of praise.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Am[a]” = having illness/disease; and “in” = staying. Being ill is called “amee.” The word “hi” means “certainty.” “SurasanghA” = the aggregate of gods; “tvAm” = in You; “vishanti” = entering [see first line of above sloka for the occurrence of these words]. Those luminous gods are like ill beings with no light when compared to Your Light, and they are entering You. As well, some are full of fear, and, with joined palms, they are saying, “save us; save us.” And the realized beings and great sages are all saying “svasti” [praise to You], and are blessing this creation with this blessed utterance. This is because: if this creation were not there, then we would not be able to see this Form of Yours which is beyond all forms; and thus, they are singing hymns of the highest praise to You. This means: one has become intoxicated by the Cosmic Form and is saying, “Here it is! This is Your Form beyond all forms! “Ritam” [governance], “satyam” [truth], “param” [supreme]. Lo! ‘Jai jagadish hare’ [glory to the Lord of creation].” “hare murAre madhukaiTabhAre gopAla govinda mukunda shaure yajnesha nArAyaNa kṛShNa viShNo nirAshrayaṃ mAṃ jagadeesha raksha” [Hari, the destroyer of Mura, Madhu and Kaitabha Gopal, Govinda, Mukunda, the greatest of heroes The Lord of the yajnas, [is] Narayana, Krishna, Vishnu I am without refuge; save me O Lord of the universe]