### Prose 
 --- 
प्रकृतिं स्वामवष्टभ्य विसृजामि पुन: पुन: |
भूतग्राममिमं कृत्स्नमवशं प्रकृतेर्वशात् || 8||
prakṛitiṁ svām avaṣhṭabhya visṛijāmi punaḥ punaḥ
bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛitsnam avaśhaṁ prakṛiter vaśhāt

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
(I,) taking refuge in My own Prakriti, through the power of Prakriti, give birth to all of these powerless living beings/phenomena again and again.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Like the face in the mirror, like the sky reflected in the water in a hole made by the hoof of a cow – in the same way, “I” am reflected in the chitta. Within this [reflection of the] “I”, I have created many “I”s. Like when one looks through a thousand-focal glass lens and sees one object as a thousand, in the same way, through My Maya, I have created innumerable forms of innumerable types from One “I”. Like when the glass lens is continuously turned and one sees that one object changing into different forms and in the end comes back to the original form – during that time, that object [that is being seen] stays fixed exactly in the same spot; it does not move, yet the turning of the lens shows crooked, bent, straight – visions of all types of illusory forms. In the same way, through the powers of My Maya going round and round, there are perceptions of my repeated births, my repeated doubts and delusions. This, like the perceptions brought about through the power of the glass lens, is the “grama” [village] of the phenomena, brought about by the power of Maya – meaning: all bodies [living and non-living] are the scenario of a magic show. None of it is at all real.