### Prose 
 --- 
अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्त: सर्वं प्रवर्तते |
इति मत्वा भजन्ते मां बुधा भावसमन्विता: || 8||
ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate
iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I, indeed, am the cause of all manifestations, and it is from Me that all proceeds. Knowing this, the knowledgeable ones, in their meditative states, worship Me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Aham” – “I” – “Paramatman” [Supreme Self]; “sarva” [all] – the garland-narrative of creation, from Brahmaa [the creator] to stones and all there is throughout creation. “Budh” [knowledgeable one; the planet Mercury] – the planet that is closest to the Sun – that is “Budh.” Thus the light of the Sun falls more on Budh. Similarly, the one who, through discriminatory-awareness, always keeps the company of the Supreme Self – that being is also “Budh” [receiving the Knowledge of the Self] – “viveki” [spiritually discerning one]. When this discrimination/discernment is attained, the sadhak [spiritual practitioner] becomes aware that “I” AM the source of all – the Cause of manifestation, and whatever states that are taking place in all living beings/phenomena such as “buddhi,” “jnana,” “asammoha” etc. [see slokas 10:4-5] – are all happening from this “I”. “I” am the One and Only refuge of all as well as their Operator. When this type of knowing happens, one is united to the State of the Self, and does the worship of “I” alone – meaning: there is no desire at all to take recourse/refuge in anything except “I”; one makes effort with the whole of life, mind and heart to just merge with That “I”. 