### Prose 
 --- 
निमित्तानि च पश्यामि विपरीतानि केशव |
न च श्रेयोऽनुपश्यामि हत्वा स्वजनमाहवे || 31||
nimittāni cha paśhyāmi viparītāni keśhava
na cha śhreyo ’nupaśhyāmi hatvā sva-janam āhave

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Krishna! I do not see anything good in killing relatives in war. I do not want victory. I don't want the kingdom. I do not even want happiness.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The use of the word “Krishna” in these slokas has been used exactly according to what is happening at this time. Krishna is Kutastha Chaitanya. “KṛShirbhurvAchako shabda Nakacha nirvANavAchakah; tayoraikyaṃ      kṛShNamityabhidheeyate.” [The sound “kṛShi” [ordinary meaning: farmer] speaks of the earth and the sound “Na” speaks of “Nirvana” [Final Liberation]; together [He] is called “Krishna.”] “Kṛshi” = sound representing the ploughing of the earth; “Nak” = sound representing “Nirvana” [Final Liberation]. The One Who pulls the person up and makes one attain Nirvana – He is the One Who is “Krishna.” Because of the desires for worldly things being strong in the mind of the sadhak, the mind becomes restless and wants to come downwards. And the body also becomes lax. But that Bewitching Form of the Kutastha that brings intoxicating ecstasy to the heart, keeps [the sadhak] pulled back [towards Kutastha]. It is as if: even if there is the desire to come down, [Kutastha/Sri Krishna] does not let [the sadhak] come down. This state of the sadhak is just like “the snake having caught the mouse.” If [the sadhak] lets go [turns away], he/she becomes blind – meaning: [the sadhak] can no longer see that heart-intoxicating Form. If [the sadhak] goes [towards Kutastha] (meaning: if one smothers and soaks oneself in that Light), then [the sadhak] dies – meaning: all of those entrenched desires are destroyed. Now [the sadhak] is afraid of both. That is why he/she is saying: “O Krishna! I do not see any benefit in destroying all of these vrittis in this war – meaning: through pranayam Kriya (because instead of peace, only disturbance is coming forth). I do not want “vijaya” [victory]; I do not even want “rajya” [kingdom] or “sukha” [happiness]. “Vijaya” [victory] = “samyama” [the coming together of dharana [concentration], dhyan [meditation] and samadhi]; “rAjyaṃ sukhani” [kingdom and happiness] = the attainment of Perfection through yoga.