### Prose 
 --- 
मयाध्यक्षेण प्रकृति: सूयते सचराचरम् |
हेतुनानेन कौन्तेय जगद्विपरिवर्तते || 10||
mayādhyakṣheṇa prakṛitiḥ sūyate sa-charācharam
hetunānena kaunteya jagad viparivartate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Kaunteya [Arjuna]! Through My “adhyaksha” [overseeing; see commentary for a definition pertinent to this sloka], Prakriti gives birth to the creation of “char” [the moving] and “achar” [the non-moving]. Through this “adhyaksha,” the creation is continuously revolving (taking birth).

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Adhyaksha” is like the ox carrying sugar. The ox exhausts himself by carrying the load, but the sugar is eaten by someone else. Similarly, I work and labor to exhaustion and the enjoyer of the fruits of that labor is someone else. In this case, I am “adhyaksha.” If one looks at the sky without blinking for a long time, one can see all kinds of nonsensical things – long, round, mixed up stuff. Those are nothing but distortions of sight. In the same way, on the screen of the chitta [personal consciousness], along with the reflection of Consciousness taking place there, Prakriti has mixed with that reflection and brought forth all kinds of created things. Those creations are “char” (that which moves about, like living beings such as animals) and “achar” (that which cannot move about, like trees and stones). But even these are following the change-bound path of creation-preservation-destruction, like the way the sight-distortions are seen in the sky. The cause of all of this is the seer’s power of sight and the conjoining with Maya. That is actually what is happening! And how much twisting about there is in this! “I do,” “I say,” “this is mine,” “that is mine,” “no one but me” - oh my, oh my oh my! One laughs at seeing this happen; one also cries at seeing this happen. When in the proximity of fire (when it is close), the water, through its own qualities, heats up and becomes hot like the fire itself, boils and puts forth sounds, bubbles, steam and many such changes of form, creating many different types of activities. Wood and such burn and change into smoke, charcoal, ashes and such and create many kinds of activities. Metals and such, as well, change in many ways according to their own qualities, and create many kinds of activities. But the fire has no error of relationship to any of those substances. It remains aloof in its own state. By simply contacting the fire, all of the substances automatically bring forth their particular natures (qualities). That is all that happens [– meaning: all of the activities happen simply because of contact with the fire]. In that work, although the fire is the cause, it has no doership over that work. In the same way, that which is called the “I”-thing (Consciousness/Spirit) is only the Cause or Overseer of all of the workings of the body. It is not the doer. Even though It is aloof and non-doing (unbound and devoid of relations), through the power of being in Its proximity (because of staying near It), the twenty-four substances (Prakriti), according to particular qualities of each, become filled with consciousness, show doership, and create many types of activities. And it is because of that that the revolutions of the creation-preservation-destruction principle (the changes of physical/material states) in the created world take place. Even though Lordship as Doer is attributed to the Supreme Self due to the proximity [to phenomena], that attribution does not cause an impediment to His aloofness.