### Prose 
 --- 
गतिर्भर्ता प्रभु: साक्षी निवास: शरणं सुहृत् |
प्रभव: प्रलय: स्थानं निधानं बीजमव्ययम् || 18||
gatir bhartā prabhuḥ sākṣhī nivāsaḥ śharaṇaṁ suhṛit
prabhavaḥ pralayaḥ sthānaṁ nidhānaṁ bījam avyayam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
It is I Who am: “gati,” “bharta,” “prabhu,” “sakshi,” “nivas,” “sharana,” “suhrit,” “prabhav,” “pralaya,” “sthan,” “nidhan” and the “avyaya beeja.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Gati” means destiny. The “gati” – meaning: the destiny-place – of this world is “I”. “Bharta” = the one who does “bharan” [filling up], or the one who nourishes – the nurturer and director. This world is directed by “ahamkar” [I-sense or ego]. That “ahamkar” is “I”.
 
“Prabhu” = “swami” [husband; master]. “I” am the “Swami” of this world.
 
“Sakshi” = the one who sees. “I” am the Witness of this world.
 
Nivas means house, within which one can abide. That is why it is a house. This world exists in Me. That is why “I” am the “nivas” of this world.
 
Sharan – that which rescues one from danger when one goes to it. The experience of the world – meaning: birth and death – is the only danger to the jiva [individual soul]. That which goes by – that is “jagat” [world; creation]. When this delusion of “going by” becomes resolved upon seeing the Supreme – that is when Eternity is revealed. In this Eternity, there is no division, no restlessness. Thus, Eternity is “svapada” [Self-ness; safety], and the opposite of “svapada” is “vipada” [non-ness; danger]. Because Eternity is Ever-Real within “I”, “I” am also the Lord Who delivers beings from the danger of this world.
 
Suhṛt – I have no need of getting any benefit from this world. However, I am always bestowing beneficence to the world. That is why I am the world’s “suhrit” [Friend]. Yet, dancing about in the form of jiva [individual soul], I am bringing about the existence of the world. I am living in agreement with the ways of the world – “sadaivanumatah suhṛt” [like a friend in all ways]. “Kalyan” [beneficence] means “being alive,” and “akalyan” [maleficence] means death.
 
Prabhav [emergence] – Mahamaya actually brings Me forth in the form of the world. Because of this, and because I come forth in the form of the world, “I” am “prabhav” [birth of the world] as well.
 
Pralaya [dissolution] – Because the entire cosmos comes to rest in Me at the end of the epoch, “I” am verily “pralaya” [dissolution of creation].
 
Sthan means a place/land on which one lives. This creation is appearing in Me. For this reason, “I” am “sthan” [place where creation exists].
 
Nidhan means the place to which one goes after work is done. When the work of this world is finished, there is only the One “I” AM. That is why “I” am “nidhan” [where one goes after the work is done].
 
Beeja [seed] – that from which there is emergence. “I” am that [seed] for this creation as well. And no one can explain the Real “I” with symbols and calculations. That is why “I” am “Avyaya” – meaning: without form/version.