### Prose 
 --- 
या निशा सर्वभूतानां तस्यां जागर्ति संयमी |
यस्यां जाग्रति भूतानि सा निशा पश्यतो मुने: || 69||
yā niśhā sarva-bhūtānāṁ tasyāṁ jāgarti sanyamī
yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni sā niśhā paśhyato muneḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
That which is night for all of phenomena, the “samyami” [see commentary below] one remains awake in that very thing. In that which all phenomena stays awake, that is the “drashta muni's” [seer sage's]  night.

### Commentary 
 --- 
When the mind stays in the Self, that time is “night” for all of the senses. At that time they stay in an inactive and dormant state. When the mind is in the worldly things, all of the senses are awake and active at that time. Keeping the mind in the Self is, verily, “samyama” (the coming together and union of dharana [concentration], dhyan [meditation] and samadhi). The one who is fixed in the Self is “samyami.” The aggregate of the senses is “phenomena.” When all of these phenomena have their “night,” at that time the samyami remains awake – meaning: at that time there is establishment in the Self; thus, that sadhak [at that time] is the seer, or witness, of the physical-, subtle- and causal-endowed universe-samsara. And because the mind is completely merged in the mind, that sadhak is “muni” [sage] (“muni saṃleenamAnasah” [one whose mind is merged is “muni”]). When the phenomena are awake, at that time it is “night” for that “drashta muni” [seer sage]. This is because at that time the mind becomes committed to worldly things; the field of the Self remains veiled by the covering of worldly experiences; and because of the Light of the Self not being seen, the path where the power of perception is in the direction of the Self is blocked. The mind, as well, because of having joined with the worldly experiences, remains disengaged in regards to the spiritual practice of the Self.