### Prose 
 --- 
मयि सर्वाणि कर्माणि संन्यस्याध्यात्मचेतसा |
निराशीर्निनर्ममो भूत्वा युध्यस्व विगतज्वर: || 30||
mayi sarvāṇi karmāṇi sannyasyādhyātma-chetasā
nirāśhīr nirmamo bhūtvā yudhyasva vigata-jvaraḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Surrender all karma [actions and their fruits] to Me and, keeping the mind on the Self, being free of hope/wishfulness and free of affection/attachment, abandon all grief and fight the war.

### Commentary 
 --- 
When the chitta [heart] thinks of nothing else but the One Self, that is when it becomes the spiritual heart. By mentally reciting the Atma-mantra in the “ayata utterance,  — Begin Footnote. — The time that it takes to count “one, two, three, four, five” - if the recitation [of the mantra] is uttered for that long, then the recitation is being done in the “ayata utterance.” — End Footnote. — and keeping the [inner] ear focused in a one-pointed way to that mentally uttered sound and then surrendering, the contemplation of the Self happens. Then there is absolutely no place in the mind for any worldly experience. Explaining in detail the matters of the True Form of the Self, Sankhyayoga, Veda, Knowledge and the establishment in Brahman to the disciple who, due to being overcome by affectionate attachment, is beset by despondency on the battlefield of sadhana, Srigurudev, after first showing the disciple the need for performing karma [spiritual acts], in order to firmly plant the methods of performing that karma, has brought together all of the methods in just a single sloka. The methods are these: (1)     “Mayi sarvANi karmANi saṃnyasya”: karma [spiritual act] has to be offered to “Me.” “O Savior! Here I am endeavoring to perform Kriya. But how to move prana, and how to recite the mantra – I do not understand the mystery of any of this at all. I do not know anything about it either. Please, have mercy on me, and do whatever needs to be done.” Casting off all vanity of mind in this way, and keeping no sense of doership and taking recourse in the natural flow of prana, and, according to the way one has learned the teachings of guru, offering prana in the path of sushumna in that way – if that happens, then the “surrendering of karma to 'Me'” happens. (2)     “AdhyAtma chetasya” [spiritual consciousness/heart]: keeping mind/heart on the Self. Its method has been already stated previously. Leaving the worldly experience and putting mind in the Self is called “asanga shastra” [unencumbered munition]. (3)     “NirAsheeh” [without hope/wishfulness]: People ordinarily attempt to get rid of the exhaustion of the day through sleep at night. Just like the way they stop all thinking and get ready to sleep, when willful thoughts remain in the mind – the mind does not even hold such thoughts – exactly like that, if one stops the thoughts of worldly experience at the start of Kriya, and then engages in Kriya – that is being “nirashi.” (4)     “Nirmamah” [not mine-ness]: There is nothing called “mine.” I am “I”. When there is this type of steady knowing, the state of “nirmama” [not mine-ness] comes about. (5)     “Vigatajvarah” [free of fever/affliction]: During the time of Kriya: “I just can't do it any more; now let me rest a bit,” “let me do a little bit of such and such thing or work; I'll just do Kriya later” - etc.- getting rid of this type of laziness and weakness – meaning: the way of situating oneself where there is no taking in of any kind of distress into the antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] – that is called “vigatajvarah” [being free of afflictions]. Being situated in that way – meaning: being armored with those types of weaponry and munitions, one has to join in the battle of sadhana (one has to endeavor into it).