### Prose 
 --- 
वायुर्यमोऽग्निर्वरुण: शशाङ्क:
प्रजापतिस्त्वं प्रपितामहश्च |
नमो नमस्तेऽस्तु सहस्रकृत्व:
पुनश्च भूयोऽपि नमो नमस्ते || 39||
vāyur yamo ’gnir varuṇaḥ śhaśhāṅkaḥ
prajāpatis tvaṁ prapitāmahaśh cha
namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kṛitvaḥ
punaśh cha bhūyo ’pi namo namas te

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
You are “vayu”; You are “yama”; You are “agni”; You are “shashanka,” “prajapati” and “prapitamaha.” A thousand salutations to You. Salutations to You again, and over and over again, salutations to You.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Vayu” means that which carries. O Lord! Whatever there is that has a beginning and end – You are holding that and carrying that on Your own Body. That is why You are “vayu.” You are “yama” as well (Chapter 9, sloka 29); You are “agni” too (Chapter 9, sloka 16); You are “varuna” as well (Chapter 10, sloka 29). The word “shash” means “reproachable” or “defect” (that which is to be discarded), and the word “anka” means “haunch” or “lap.” The light that is the Eternal Light, the permanence which is Eternity – the illusory vision that is had by placing the impermanent, non-illuminating Maya on the Lap of That [Eternal Light; Eternity] – that is the state of “shashanka.” This is also You. That is because everything is within You. “Prajapati” – the group of creators who create the lives in the world of living beings; they are the creators or fathers; because of them, the living beings are born – [prajapatis] such as Daksha, Kardam, Kashyap [mythological figures] etc. This is also You. Their father is Brahmaa [creator], that is why he is “pitamaha” [grandfather] and that is also You. That Brahmaa has arisen in the lotus from Your navel. That is why You are “prapitamaha” [great-grandfather]. Thus: O Father! O Mother! O Supporter! O Savior! Salutations to You! And I bow to You again and again!