### Prose 
 --- 
त्रैविद्या मां सोमपा: पूतपापा
यज्ञैरिष्ट्वा स्वर्गतिं प्रार्थयन्ते |
ते पुण्यमासाद्य सुरेन्द्रलोक
मश्नन्ति दिव्यान्दिवि देवभोगान् || 20||
trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā
yajñair iṣhṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante
te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam
aśhnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Those who know the three Vedas – they worship me through yajna [rite], and, upon having imbibed “soma” [ritual liquid] and having become “nishpaap” [free of sins], pray to go to heaven. After attaining the plane of “surendra” [lord of high beings], they enjoy the divine and godly pleasures.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Trai” [of three] means the rulers of rajas, sattva and tama gunas – [respectively] Brahmaa, Vishnu and Mahesh – these three gods. During the time of sitting and doing Kriya, when the union of the three gunas comes about – it is at that time that the separateness within the trinity of these gods comes to an end. At that time, Prakriti is in a state where sattva, rajas and tamas are in equilibrium – meaning: She takes the pursuits of dharma [righteous living], “artha” [prosperity] and “kama” [fulfillment of desires] and puts them away in Her womb and waits longingly for Liberation. The revelatory brightness of sattva, the active principle of rajas, and the settledness of tamas all become one, and have become inactive, they only take their positions [in the nature of things] and nothing more. This extremely high state of Maya is called “traividya” [knowledge of the three]. It is right after this state that Maya falls into “I” and becomes “I”. When this state comes about for the sadhak – at that time nectar (“soma” juice) falls from the Sahasrar, and that nectar nourishes the sadhak from head to toe. That is why at that time the sadhak is “somapayee” [recipient/drinker of nectar]. During this state, the sadhak does not have any restlessness whatsoever; that is why the sadhak is “nishpaap” [free of sins]. The flood of this nectar – this very thing is “yajna” [rite]. [But] this state is not a state of “seed-free” samadhi. That is why the sadhak [in this state] experiences enjoyment of Brahman-ness in the divine place (the City of Consciousness) according to times of repose. This pleasure is not comparable to anything of this world of death [Earthly existence]. That is why it is called “deva-bhoga” [godly/celestial pleasures]. “ATho prahAr jo laDe so sur” [one who fights through all eight divisions of the day is “sur” [high being]; this is a Hindi phrase] – meaning: one who is able to do Kriya for all eight divisions of the day – that is the one who is “sur” [high being]. Not a single breath of that being is wasted. That is the being who is “surendra” [king of high beings].