### Prose 
 --- 
तान्समीक्ष्य स कौन्तेय: सर्वान्बन्धूनवस्थितान् |
कृपया परयाविष्टो विषीदन्निदमब्रवीत् || 27||
tān samīkṣhya sa kaunteyaḥ sarvān bandhūn avasthitān
kṛipayā parayāviṣhṭo viṣhīdann idam abravīt

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
That son of Kunti (Arjuna), upon seeing all of those friends being present at the place of war, became overcome with pathos and despondency, and said these words.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The sadhak, after having received the teachings of guru and proceeding to attain establishment in the Supreme State, sees that – verily – all of the vrittis [inner aspects that cause action] of worldly enjoyments will have to be destroyed. But even though [the sadhak] has an intense desire to be established in the Supreme State, because the desire to enjoy worldly ways are strong at that [same] time, he/she perceives the vrittis of “bhoga” [worldly-enjoyments] as the relations that are most close to him/her, whereupon [the sadhak] softens the strict teachings of guru, and in order to firm up one's own desirousness according one's own wishes, he/she starts crying – like whining a mantra that enamors one [to bhoga]. “I will enjoy the worldly things. I will also do yoga. And I will also be a sadhu. If it is like this, then that will be really what I like.” That effort to stay bound to the powers of one's own desires has been addressed with the word “Kaunteya” [son of “Kunti” – Arjuna's mother]. Kunti used a mantra of attractive powers and brought gods under her power. Similarly, Arjuna too emulates his mother's nature and [seemingly] brings Krishna (guru) under his [Arjuna's] power and tries to be both bhogi and yogi.
 
Guru has instructed to give up the desires for worldly things, but the disciple, feeling that those very worldly-desires are his most intimate possessions, is being very compassionate (addicted) towards them. Thereafter, the kinds of feelings that rise up in the mind when one is in this kind of state – [the sadhak/Arjuna] speaks about that.
