### Prose 
 --- 
तस्य सञ्जनयन्हर्षं कुरुवृद्ध: पितामह: |
सिंहनादं विनद्योच्चै: शङ्खं दध्मौ प्रतापवान् || 12||
tasya sañjanayan harṣhaṁ kuru-vṛiddhaḥ pitāmahaḥ
siṁha-nādaṁ vinadyochchaiḥ śhaṅkhaṁ dadhmau pratāpavān

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Then the mighty Kuru elder and grandfather Bhishma roared loudly like a lion and sounded his conch-shell [like a horn], giving rise to joy in him (Duryodhana).

### Commentary 
 --- 
When bad luck falls, even humorous words can become insulting. Duryodhana, after inflaming anger in his guru against the Pandavas, desired his own benefit and ended up saying this insulting statement: “the teacher of the sons of Pandu” [referring to Drona]. The guru was a little hurt emotionally [by this statement]. The guru thought, “Duryodhana gives me money; that is why today he called me 'the teacher of the sons of Pandu'; he did not admit that I am his guru [as well]. Besides, he even showed his lordship over me.” Thinking this, out of contempt, [Drona] decided not to respond to Duryodhana's [other more] entreating words. Bhishma, realizing the teacher's contempt, roared like a lion and sounded his conch-shell [in order to instill confidence in the Kaurava side].
 
When the vrittis of bhoga-desires are strong, at that time, [the wisdom of] the impermanence and the limitedness of the fruits of bhoga [enjoyments] find no place in the mind. Although at that time all of the positives and negatives of satisfying the desires for pleasure do arise in the mind once in a while, but because of the power of wanting, there is restlessness; thus the intellect does not work properly. The intellect is not really at play [in this situation]; only the endeavors of the “I-ness” or “ahamkar” [ego] take place. That is what is stated here sequentially as the unresponsiveness of Dronacharya, and the lion's roar and sounding of the conch-shell by Bhishma.
 
“The lion's roar”; “conch-shell”: In the early stages of sadhana, when vital air begins to have stops due to the practice of a certain Kriya, then, because of the effects of not enough practice and being bound to the power of desires and due to the pushing power of the air, the sadhak is forced to expel the retained air. And in order to get quick relief from the torment of that retention of air, [the sadhak] exhales a long breath in such a forceful manner that it sounds like a lion's roar within [the body]. And right along with that another sound rises (that sound can be heard even with little practice). It's resonance is heavy and somber. That is the conch-shell sound of Bhishma. Because of that breath going out forcefully, the body feels good. And because the sound is pleasant to hear, there is quite a joyful feeling that comes about. Because of that, the vrittis of desires become excited and alive, as there is the feeling that there is again a chance to enjoy the external worldly pleasures. This is what is spoken of as Duryodhana's joy. As one goes [concentrates] to listen to that sound which is pleasant to hear, a little later – because of the pressure of air – [the sounds] change into a mixed-up, confused and unclear kind of noise. That is why it is called “tumul” [tumultous] (that is spoken about later).
 
That the [person referred to as] “kuruvṛddhah pitAmahah” [elder of the Kurus, the grandfather] is Bhishma – the reason for that [identification] can be understood easily if the Kuru [Kauravas] family lineage written below is read with the meanings according to yoga shastras.

(Note — See actual book for figure.)

Shantanu = The Immutable Brahman-Consciousness. Ganga [Ganges] = Consciousness as Manifestation. Bhishma = reflected consciousness. (Ganga gave birth to eight children. Those are the Ashtavasu [a certain group of eight supernatural beings]. The eighth one's name was “Prabhas”  - [meaning:] egoism or Bhishma.  Satyavati = Material Nature. Vedavyas = incisive knowledge (offspring of the rishi Parashara). 
 
In the Pandava Lineage there is — 
Chitrangada = primal creative substance
Ambika = the vritti of doubt
Pandu = pure intellect (he is neuter, even though his manifestation [as a person] is male)
Kunti = power of nivritti
Madri = addiction in nivritti (renouncing)
Yudhishthira = space-element (attribute of sound)
Bhima = air-element (attributes of sound and touch)
Arjuna = fire/energy-element (attributes of sound, touch and sight)
Nakula = water/liquid-element (attributes of sound, touch, sight and taste)
Sahadeva = earth-element (attributes of sound, touch, sight, taste and smell)
Draupadi = Kulakundalini
Subhadra = power of great beneficence
Abhimanyu = samyama – meaning: dharana [concentration], dhyan [meditation] and samadhi coming together as one


In the Dhritarashtra lineage there is — 
Vichitravirya = primal ego
Ambalika = the vritti of certainty
Dhritarashtra = mind (blind)
Gandhari = power of pravritti
Vaishya = addiction in pravritti (grasping)
Duryodhana and such = lust, greed and such
Yuyutsu = the desire for war (he, with his soldiers, had taken the side of the Pandavas at the beginning of the war)
