### Prose 
 --- 
पुरोधसां च मुख्यं मां विद्धि पार्थ बृहस्पतिम् |
सेनानीनामहं स्कन्द: सरसामस्मि सागर: || 24||
purodhasāṁ cha mukhyaṁ māṁ viddhi pārtha bṛihaspatim
senānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ sarasām asmi sāgaraḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Partha [Arjuna]! Know Me to be “Brihaspati,” the Premier among the priests. It is I Who am “Kartik” among the soldiers, and among the bodies of water I am the ocean.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The word “purodhas” [see first line of sloka above] means “purohit” [priest] – meaning: the one who is the holder, from the beginning. (The work/rite cannot be accomplished simply with the power of pure kshatriyas [caste of kings and warriors]. Along with the power of kshatriyas, the power of Brahman is necessary. It is for this reason that the protectors of kings – meaning: the holders of their righteousness – are priests. Thus, by the use of the word “purodhas,” this is meant: “the one who is holding from the beginning.” This is shown by the fact that the protective rites such as fire offerings and such are done by the priests.) The One Who is holding is holding Maya itself. This Maya is “brihat” [the “big”]. The “pati” [husband] of this “brihat” is “Brihaspati.” When the Knowledge of Brahman arose in the Royal Sage Janaka, he spoke out like this, “Lo! How wondrous I AM! I Myself bow to Me. There is no one who has accomplished what I have, as even without touching this body, I am eternally sustaining/holding the Cosmos-Body.” — Begin Footnote. — “Aho ahaṃ namo mahyaṃ dasksho nasti hi matsamah; asaṃspṛshyashareereNa yena vishvaṃ chiraṃ dhṛtam.” - Ashtavakra Samhita, sloka 2:13. — End Footnote. — Thus, among the priests, I am the Premier Brihaspati. Know this. Here, among “jiva” [individual], “Ishvara” [personal God] and “I”, “I” am the Primary One. — Begin Footnote. — Dear sadhak. Look. The jiva [individual] is “purodhas” [priest], the Reflection [personal God] in the chitta [personal consciousness] is also “purodhas” and “I” am also “purodhas.” Among these three “I” am the Primary One. — End Footnote. —

SenAneenAmahaṃ skandah [among the soldiers I am “Skanda” [Kartik]]. “Sena” [soldier[s]] means people – meaning: those who have been born. All of them are fighting with these two things: “me” and “mine.” This battle – its director is “vasana” [embedded desire]. “Vasa” [residing] happens in the yoni [place of abidance] – meaning: the one who is in the place of abidance, that one is “vasana.” This “vasana” is the aggregate of soldiers. “Skanda[h]” = “sa” + “ka” + “na” + “da” + “:” [this is not a “colon”; this is the symbol of visarga which symbolizes extinguishing and concluding words and sounds with an added aspirated sound to the original word, like adding an “h”] (“s”). The adjoining of this “s” shows half-becoming [almost getting there]. “Sa” = subtle breath; “ka” = head; “na” = negation; not; “da” = yoni. Therefore, it [the meaning of “Skanda”] is this: the time when one has taken the subtlest of subtle breaths up to the head through the void-yoni, and is only awaiting Freedom – meaning: when “vasana” [desire] no longer moves about in all kinds of ways below and has let go of all vibration, and is one-pointedly focused on Emancipation and going that way – the state that happens at that time – that is called “Skanda.” This state and the “I” have a close transference with each other. That is why “visarga” (: [signifying the “h” sound]) is enjoined. That is why “I” am “Skandah.” (See Chapter 8, sloka 3 regarding “visarga.”)
 
SarasAsmi sAgarah – “sarasAṃ” – “sa” + “ra” + “sa” + “Aṃ”; “sa” = subtle breath; “ra” = revelatory light; revelation; “sa” = subtle breath”: “Aṃ” = “aasakti” = addiction. In the revelatory light of the subtle breath, an addiction to the subtle breath happens. Dear sadhak! See! That addiction becomes the ocean. “SAgara” [ocean] – “sA” = addiction to the subtle breath; “gara” = poison – meaning: that addiction spreads like poison. Just by putting attention on exhalation and inhalation, the out-breaths and in-breaths become gradually smaller and smaller until there is a state of the stoppage of breathing. At that time, that limitation-bound subtleness gradually disappears and transforms into unlimited subtleness. At that time, that very unlimited subtleness is “asmi” [am] – meaning: “I”. This is of the inner. And outside, whatever water there is – canal, swamp, creek, pond, tributary, river – whatever – all water is of the sea. And those forms are just fragments of the form of the sea, but limited. The sea is borderless, boundless. That is why as far as the forms of water, it is in the sea that there is the full manifestation of “I”.