### Prose 
 --- 
उत्सीदेयुरिमे लोका न कुर्यां कर्म चेदहम् |
सङ्करस्य च कर्ता स्यामुपहन्यामिमा: प्रजा: || 24||
utsīdeyur ime lokā na kuryāṁ karma ched aham
sankarasya cha kartā syām upahanyām imāḥ prajāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
If I do not perform action, then all of these “lokas” [people; or: planes of existence] would perish, and I would be the cause of everything mixing together, and I would be the cause of the destruction of all of these creatures.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Upon being “atandrita” [see sloka 3:23] and thereupon crossing past the karmic imperative - “pṛthveesheerNA jale magnA jalaṃ magnancha tejasi; leenaṃ vAyau tathA tejo vyomni vAto layaṃ yayau; avidyAyAṃ mahAkasho leeyate parame pade” - etc. — Begin Footnote. — This is from the Shiva Samhita, First Patala, sloka 83. [Translators' note: In current versions of the Shiva Samhita, this is sloka 78 of Chapter 1.] Its meaning: in Layayoga [the yoga of dissolution] the earth-element diminishes and merges with the water-element, and water merges into heat (fire). Similarly (in that same way), fire merges with air, air merges with “vyoma” [ether] (space), and Mahakash [the great space] merges with Avidya, and the Avidya merges with Param Pada [Supreme Thing] (Param Brahman). — End Footnote. —  [see footnote following this sloka 2:24 for translation] – in Layayoga [the yoga of dissolution], all of the elements diminish, and, with one merging into another [level by level], get to the uppermost stage. At that time, the union of the Prakritic substance and the Substance of the Self causes “sankara” [blending together] to happen. Things opposite to each other coming together in one place is that which is called “sankara.” When this type of “sankara” takes place, the creation-facing functionality of Prakriti comes to an end, and functionality becomes Brahman-directed, and “praja” [creature] (that which has been born) – meaning: all of those vrittis [functionalities] by which creation flourishes – those are destroyed. (When this state is attained, one knows quite well that the sadhak is the lord over Prakriti. It is then that the “swami” epithet happens to the sadhak.