### Prose 
 --- 
न त्वेवाहं जातु नासं न त्वं नेमे जनाधिपा |
न चैव न भविष्याम: सर्वे वयमत: परम् || 12||
na tvevāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ
na chaiva na bhaviṣhyāmaḥ sarve vayamataḥ param

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
That there was a time when I was not – that is not how it is; that you were not – that is also not how it is. That these kings were not – that is not how it is. That we will not continue after this – that is also not how it is.

### Commentary 
 --- 
“I” = the “Self-ness,” or Paramatman [Supreme Self]; “you” = the “jiva-ness”; “janAdheepa” [rulers of people] - “jana” [people] = the aggregate of the vrittis of the antahkarana [inner operators]; “adheepa” = those among [the aforementioned vrittis] that are primary. This conscious body that has come about with the combination of the “Self-ness” and the “jiva-ness” - these jiva-ness and Self-ness were there before this body's coming into existence; the inner vrittis were also there. If they were not there, they would not have come together/combined now. The reason is this: the past and present are bound by the bindings of karma. If the bindings are not undone, this combination [“Self-ness”, “jiva-ness” etc.] will continue later as well – meaning: again there will be “I”, “you”, “these people”  - all of this [will happen again].
 
In the wheel of Time, as the dharma of the particular “yugas” [epochs] appears in the progression of the “manvantara” [the age of “Manu” and the span of time containing the four yugas], the deliverance of sages, the destruction of evil-doers and the establishment of dharma becomes necessary because of the law of regulation/balance. And whenever there is the decline of dharma and the flourishing of adharma [unrighteousness; ungodliness], it is then, due to the law of regulation/balance, a Deific Form appears in order to fulfill that longing for deliverance, appropriate to the time and place. That Deific Form is known by names such as “Rama,” “Shyam” [Sri Krishna], “Buddha,” “Kalki,” “Jesus,” “Muhammad,” “Chaitanya” etc. How many times and in how many forms that “Rama,” “Shyam” etc. have come – there is no way of keeping track of such. It is impossible to limit the Infinite. If the operative aspects of [personal and phenomenal] nature and character are carefully examined, it is seen that character and nature take turns [in doing the same activities] – meaning: revolves (round and round) [repeats again and again] – according to the progression [of the times], and they produce the same kinds of operative conditions [in every round]. Thus, “the decline of dharma and the flourishing of adharma” is an expected operative condition. When this operative condition appears, then, in order to produce the [righteous] condition that is appropriate for the time, the Deific Form, which is associated with “Self-ness,” appears. As long as there has been, is and will be a world, for so long has there been, is, and will be the incarnation of this Deific Form.
