### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वभूतानि कौन्तेय प्रकृतिं यान्ति मामिकाम् |
कल्पक्षये पुनस्तानि कल्पादौ विसृजाम्यहम् || 7||
sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya prakṛitiṁ yānti māmikām
kalpa-kṣhaye punas tāni kalpādau visṛijāmyaham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! At the time of the destruction/end of the “kalpa” [epoch; see commentary below for deeper explanation] (at the time of “pralaya” [dissolution]), all living beings/phenomena merge into My Prakriti. At the beginning of the “kalpa” (at the time of “srishti” [creation]), I again give them birth. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
The home of water is the ocean. Through the sucking power of air, the water is sucked up by air and goes up into the sky, like steam from boiling rice. That sap that you see ready to drip forth from the newly sprouted leaf of a tree located in the highest place on the highest mountain on Earth – that sap too is ultimately the water of the great ocean. Through the air’s sucking power, the sucked up water droplets rise up to the sky, and through the aid of air, become transformed into clouds, and then by raining, make the entire Earth wet, become rivers, return to the sea and become the sea. These are “kalpadi” [beginning of the “kalpa” or time of existence]] and “kalpakshaya” [end of the “kalpa” or time of existence]. In the same way, when the mind leaves behind conceptualizing and takes refuge in the intellect, right then, the intellect takes the ego as its refuge. This ego is the “little ‘I’” or jiva [personal being]. For as long as the sadhak does not go through the chitta [personal consciousness above the ego] and does not get to the upper side of Vivasvan [see commentary to slokas 4:1-2 of the Pranab Gita], for that long does the sadhak have to remain a slave to the chitta [personal consciousness]. For this reason, even after experiencing the paravastha of Kriya, the sadhak has to return to the state of samsara – meaning: the state after the paravastha of Kriya. This is “kalpadi” [beginning of the epoch]. I experienced the Brahman-ness in the paravastha of Kriya; and then, out of my control, samsara reappeared, and again I went on dancing about, dressed up as the jiva. This is a perception from being under the power of Prakriti, and it is the daily experience of “pralaya” [dissolution] and “janmagrahan” [taking birth]. This is of a short duration. After physical death, there is a longer duration of the post-death state and then there is rebirth after that duration. To stay even longer in the state of being merged is called “mahapralaya” [grand dissolution]. The merged state is called “kalpakshaya” [the destruction – or end – of the time of existence]. And the Prakritic emergence is called “the beginning of the ‘kalpa’ [time of existence].” As Prakriti, leaning on Me, is going round and round in intoxication without taking “Me,” all of the play with the things of Prakriti that is going on automatically – those things are powerlessly joining that game of going round and round as well. These are “kalpadi” [beginning of the time of existence] and “kalpakshaya” [end of the time of existence]. 