### Prose 
 --- 
शक्नोतीहैव य: सोढुं प्राक्शरीरविमोक्षणात् |
कामक्रोधोद्भवं वेगं स युक्त: स सुखी नर: || 23||
śhaknotīhaiva yaḥ soḍhuṁ prāk śharīra-vimokṣhaṇāt
kāma-krodhodbhavaṁ vegaṁ sa yuktaḥ sa sukhī naraḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The human being that has the capability to withstand the forces of desire and anger – that is the one who is “yukta” [united]; that is the one who is “sukhee” [happy].

### Commentary 
 --- 
Happiness is the human being's main aim. In that area, the happiness of the worldly experience is impermanent and the cause of pain, and the Happiness of the Bliss of the Self is Unending. Therefore, the Happiness of the Bliss of the Self is the Supreme Spiritual Goal. But desire and anger are in the way of the attainment of the Supreme Spiritual Goal (obstacles). The deluding power or the attraction of the worldly experience is desire itself. When there is opposition to this desire (resistance), it changes to anger. (See Chapter 3, sloka 37 [of the Gita].) Desire and anger attack the sadhak both inside and outside. The one who, while being in contact with the worldly experience during the waking state, is not enraptured by the matters of enjoyment, and is not perturbed by the lack of the matters of enjoyment, whether in health, illness and all conditions, all the way until death – that is the one who is happy. This is the matter of the external experience. Similarly, inside: during the practice of guru-instructed Kriya, for as long as the mind stays in “iha” [this] – meaning: in the five elements, for that long, along with all of the vrittis of mind becoming extremely subtle, the force of that desire and anger becomes strong, and they stealthily attack the mind. The one who, in this state, until the point of piercing the Agyana-chakra and getting into Kutastha (prAk shareeravimokshaNAt [before the “body's” emancipation]), takes recourse in discrimination and detachment and is able to withstand that force, is able to keep attention on Kutastha without wavering, and is not disturbed even a little bit – it is that one who is “yukta” [united]; it is that one who is “sukhee” [happy] – meaning: that being is yoga-united, and attains Shelter in the Beautiful Sky of Consciousness.