### Prose 
 --- 
स्वभावजेन कौन्तेय निबद्ध: स्वेन कर्मणा |
कर्तुं नेच्छसि यन्मोहात्करिष्यस्यवशोऽपि तत् || 60||
swbhāva-jena kaunteya nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā
kartuṁ nechchhasi yan mohāt kariṣhyasy avaśho ’pi tat

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Kaunteya [Arjuna]! You are bound to doing the karma [ordained acts] of yours, which are born of your nature. That which you are not willing to do because being under the power of delusion – that you will do, even helplessly [against your will]. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
As one’s nature is – that one is bound to do the karma [ordained acts] according to that. Even if one has no desire to do so because of falling into the delusion of non-discernment, that person’s nature will helplessly (by force) make one do that. Thus, the desire that Arjuna has – that he will not do battle – that is false [useless]. This is because the nature of kshatriya, with which he was born, will not leave him. According to the desire of the Lord – the Ordainer of the fruits of karma, that [karma] will become strong in the appropriate time, will compel him [Arjuna] helplessly and the karma [duty] born of his nature will defeat the desire and will definitely engage him in battle. If that karma born of one’s own nature is carried out willingly, the bondage to karma [all meanings of the word] is destroyed. And if one does it unwillingly, and is forced helplessly by one’s nature, that bondage becomes even more tangled. It is for this reason that the Lord has said, just a bit previously, “svakrmaNA tamabhyArchya siddhiṃ vindati mAnavah” [worshipping while carrying out one’s own karma [duty], the human being comes to know perfection], and in Chapter 11 He has said, “nimittamAtraṃ bhava savyasAchin” [you are only an instrument, O ambidextrous archer] (see the commentary to this [sloka 11:33 of the Bhagavad Gita]).

How this “helplessly being forced to do an undesired work” is – let me explain this with the example of an experience in Kriya. The sadhak who has gone through this will know. To sleep at night is in our nature from birth. So, one thinks that one will not sleep, and that Kriya must be done all night. Resolving to do this, the mind begins to do Kriya with great enthusiasm. Not too long afterwards, a kind of standstill state comes in Kriya spontaneously, and the mind’s enthusiasm diminishes a bit. At that time, one’s own nature rises up in the mind. It somehow spreads itself over the mind. The mind becomes subservient to it. Then [one’s nature] goes on giving the mind a reasoning that says, “Oh, so I have conquered it. If one just wants to do Kriya, one can easily do it all night. Kriya will have to be done all night. There will not be any sleeping at all. But, Kriya has been performed for quite a while now. If I just lie down for a minute or so and ease up the stiffness of the body, it will be good. And right after one minute, I will get up and Kriya will be started up again.” This kind of advice and reasoning then becomes irrefutable to the mind in just a few moments. How irrefutable this becomes – the one who has suffered this – that is the one who will understand.  Laying down just for one minute according to that reasoning – then – done! All practice is washed out. One’s nature is fully victorious. Deep sleep completely envelops [the sadhak]. All is wasted! After waking, there is the regret, “Oh my, oh my, why did I lie down?!” This is why there is the injunction of “yuktasvapnAvabodha” [having a reasonable amount of sleep [which allows] alertness during the waking state]. One has to sleep. Go ahead and willingly lay down and sleep. Then get up. After getting up, do Kriya. If one does like this, gradually sleep will be conquered. Otherwise, if one says, “I will not sleep at all” – why would one’s nature leave one? It will overcome one and put one to sleep for sure. And with that, all of that effort will be lost, and one will just experience regret. That is why the Lord is telling Arjuna, again and again, “svakarmaNya tamabhyarchya siddhiṃ vindati mAnavah” – meaning: by performing the duty born of one’s nature and worshipping God by that, one attains perfection. Gradually, one transcends one’s nature, and one becomes self-empowered. This is why the Lord is telling Arjuna in this sloka [18:60]: “You are still bound by the karma [duty] born of your own nature. You have not been able to transcend your nature yet. So, even if there is no desire to do the natural duty, your nature will make you do it. Therefore, stay under the power of your nature, with the mind being unattached to everything, and go on doing Kriya. Your nature will automatically change.” 