### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
कालोऽस्मि लोकक्षयकृत्प्रवृद्धो
लोकान्समाहर्तुमिह प्रवृत्त: |
ऋतेऽपि त्वां न भविष्यन्ति सर्वे
येऽवस्थिता: प्रत्यनीकेषु योधा: || 32||
śhrī-bhagavān uvācha
kālo ’smi loka-kṣhaya-kṛit pravṛiddho
lokān samāhartum iha pravṛittaḥ
ṛite ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣhyanti sarve
ye ’vasthitāḥ pratyanīkeṣhu yodhāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The Lord said: “I am the loka-destroying [manifestation destroying], overpowering Time. I have now become engaged in order to destroy all lokas [planes; people; manifestation]. (Thus,) even without you killing them, all of the warriors that are present here on their respective sides – none of them will remain.” 

### Commentary 
 --- 
Whatever the astonished sadhak has just seen from [still] abiding in Prakriti – now, with his/her own experience, the sadhak is resolving those very things. The sadhak is observing: whatever I am seeing, I am actually seeing it/them with closed eyes. Is it possible to see with the eyes closed? It is with open eyes that people see all the things that are outside and are separate from the body. That is what is usually called “seeing.” Now what kind of seeing is this? None of this is outside! Everything is within me! O Lord. All of the activities of creation, preservation and destruction are actually happening within me! Yet, I am not touching them, nor am I doing anything. What to say, I am seeing that not even a little bit of change is happening to me. So that is how it is! So it means that the abode where karmas end is the “I” in me? Lo! Who is this “I”? The One Whose food is karma itself – is it so that that karma-eater is “I”? Now what in the world is this that I am knowing? Who is this “I”? “KAlo’smi lokakshayakṛt pravṛddhe” – the immense, boundless loka-destroying [manifestationdestroying] Time am “I”. Now I have become engaged in taking away (destroying) those lokas [planes; people; manifestation]. O Arjuna! All of those [beings/attributes] of the two sides that you see that have come to fight – now even if you do not do battle (do Kriya), not a single one of them will remain alive in the future. This is because the sadhak is seeing this: the kind of “time” that is arising due to the fruits of Kriya – at that, all are being ended automatically in the “I” Itself. The “I” is without end. 