### Prose 
 --- 
कविं पुराणमनुशासितार
मणोरणीयांसमनुस्मरेद्य: |
सर्वस्य धातारमचिन्त्यरूप
मादित्यवर्णं तमस: परस्तात् || 9||
kaviṁ purāṇam anuśhāsitāram
aṇor aṇīyānsam anusmared yaḥ
sarvasya dhātāram achintya-rūpam
āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt

प्रयाणकाले मनसाचलेन
भक्त्या युक्तो योगबलेन चैव |
भ्रुवोर्मध्ये प्राणमावेश्य सम्यक्
स तं परं पुरुषमुपैति दिव्यम् || 10||
prayāṇa-kāle manasāchalena
bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena chaiva
bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśhya samyak
sa taṁ paraṁ puruṣham upaiti divyam

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
At the time of death, the one who – being filled with devotion and with a steady mind – puts prana into the space between the eyebrows through the power of yoga, and contemplates the All-knowing, the Beginning-less, the Ruler, the Subtlest of the subtle, the Holder and Lord of all, the Incomprehensible, Sun-like Self beyond the darkness of illusion – that person attains that Divine Supreme Person.

### Commentary 
 --- 
At the time of departure [death], if one is filled with devotion, and with a steady mind puts prana – completely – into the middle of the eyebrows via the power of yoga, and contemplates “kaviṃ purANam” [the time immemorial glories of the Lord], one can indeed attain that “paramam divyam purusham” [Supreme Divine Person] – meaning: (1) devotion, (2) putting prana into the middle of the eyebrows via the power of yoga, and (3) “mAmanusmaraN” [remembrance of Me; or: remembrance of My Particle/Essence; see first line of commentary to sloka 8:7 of the Pranab Gita] – it is by these three methods that the Lord is known at the time of departure [death].

This “Purush” [the Supreme Being] – He is “kavi” [poet] (one who is ever-new in his utterances – that is the one who is “kavi” [inspired poet]). When that Purush is seen, right then, so many effulgent and power-filled things come out of that Purush – that it is like this: I am looking with unblinking sight; so many things of so many kinds are coming out [of Him] endlessly; where they are coming from – I cannot figure out, yet I am not seeing one thing for a second time; only ever-new visions are appearing. The one who has seen is the only one who has seen. It cannot be made to be understood by speaking about it. That is why the Speaker says, “kavi” [inspired poet].

“PurANAm” [ancient] – anAdisiddhaṃ chirantanaṃ [beginning-less and ancient] – meaning: there is no past or future in this Purush [Supreme Being]. There is only the Present. He exists since beginning-less time; that is why He is called “Puraan Purush” [Ancient Person]. If the sadhak would please make a little effort and practice Kriya, he/she can see Hari [God] – the Lord of the Cosmos. Dear sadhak! That which you are seeing now – it is not so that no one else will ever see that or has not seen it before. The one who makes effort properly, that person is the one who will see.

“AnushAsitAram” [ruler] – meaning: the Purush Who is the Ruler of the Cosmos. When an Eye and eye meet, it can be seen that He is looking directly, steadily. The one who sees this – just as soon as there is blinking in that person’s eye, immediately is Purush covered up. But Purush is looking steadily and standing there as the Witness. Whatever good and bad that I am doing (virtue or sin), He is seeing this with unblinking Eyes. Even if my sight is covered up by Prakriti, the Prakritic covering does not work in regards to Purush. Atoms and particles – all are under His rule. That is why He is “niyanta” [Ruler].
“AnoraNeeyAṃsam” – [meaning:] atomically smaller than atoms; subtler than the subtlest. This particle of the earth-substance that you are seeing – within one particle of this earth-substance, there are 10 particles of water. In the same way, within one particle of this water-substance, there are 10 particles of fire; within one particle of fire, there are 10 particles of air; and within one particle of air, there are 10 particles of space. Thus, within a physical being, there is no element that is subtler than space. Within one particle of this space there are 10 particles of Brahman. That is why I am saying: this Purush cannot be grasped by the senses. The ruler of the senses is mind. As long as there is mind, this Purush cannot be seen. That is why the Teacher has spoken about this Purush as “the Particle.” When the sadhak takes the upper direction from the solidest of the solid, earth-element and goes upward through water, fire, air, space and drives into the even subtler-than-space particles of Brahman – it is then that “anuchintana” [contemplation on the Particle] happens for the sadhak.

“Sarvasya dhAtAram” [the Holder of all] – the Lord and Holder/Sustainer of all. Just at the time that the sadhak leaves behind the particles of the space-element and drives into the particles of Brahman, right then does the sadhak become the Unchangeable Witness Itself and attains the Purush-State, and sees the Self as the Holder/Sustainer (“dhatak” [the holder; substratum]) of everything that is manifested – from this particle of the earth-element to the Goddess of creation Maya. This Purush is called “sarvasya dhAtA” [the Holder/Foundation of all].

“Achintyaroopam” [incomprehensible] – meaning: this Form cannot be perceived through thinking, because thought is the indulgence in “krita karma” [works that are done]. This Purush is not in works that are done. Whatever actions/works that are there – this Purush is just beyond that. That is why [He is] “achintyaroomam” [the Incomprehensible].

“Tamasah parastAt” [beyond darkness] – Like the black region within the white region in the eye, a dark sphere is seen within the Great Brilliant White Light within Kutastha. That is the Prakriti-sphere. That is “tamah” [darkness]. It is endowed with the powers of covering and throwing out. Thus, it gradually spreads the cover of darkness and covers up the [inner] sight, and does not allow the vision of the Knowledge-filled One even from a distance. Through the power of sadhana, one destroys that covering, and when one pierces through that “tamah” [darkness] and goes to the other side of that, one sees the Self-Revealed, Knowledge-filled Supreme Person. That is why it has been said: “tamasAh parstAt” – meaning: existing beyond the “tamah” or the Prakritic darkness.

“AdityavarNam” [sun-like] – meaning: just at the time that the sadhak has destroyed the covering upon having left the particles of the space-element and is about to attack the particles of Brahman – right then, luminous – like a Brilliant, Incomprehensible Sun – (unknown by mind and intellect, which together are “impurity itself”), this Purush – “Bhaskar” [Effulgent] – of Self-Knowing comes forth. Coming to this Purush is the same as coming to the end of the sadhana of the sadhak in this world of death. Going back from Here to the particle of the earth-element is that which is called “yuktavastha” [in this case: re-joined to the material world; see footnote 7 of this Chapter 8 of the Pranab Gita for an opposite connotation of “yuktavastha.”]. The sadhak has to be careful before getting to this Purush. If it is so, then there is no return [to birth and death]. When one goes to the particles of Brahman after leaving the particles of the space-element, right then – if one follows the procedure stated in the previous slokas and comes to the Ajna-chakra – together and at the same time, the mind and prana come face to face with that Purush. Therefore, one becomes unmoving, unshakeable, still. At this time, because the activity-oriented Prakriti longs to unite with non-active Brahman, the Union of Maya and Brahman begins. Just as – at the joining-place of the ocean and river, the force of the river merges into the ocean and gradually becomes peaceful and becomes the ocean itself – in a similar way, when the state of jiva-ness is lifted up from the region of Prakritic sporting upon stopping the game, and as one returns to the region of the State of Shiva – right then, one becomes this Purush. For as long as the prana-vayu does not rise to the middle of the eyebrows and therefore does not pierce the Ajna-chakra, for that long will there be unsettled activity. As soon as one pierces the Ajna-chakra and rises above, right then is there the beginning of non-doing. And in this state, there is attainment. 