### Prose 
 --- 
अथ चैनं नित्यजातं नित्यं वा मन्यसे मृतम् |
तथापि त्वं महाबाहो नैवं शोचितुमर्हसि || 26||
atha chainaṁ nitya-jātaṁ nityaṁ vā manyase mṛitam
tathāpi tvaṁ mahā-bāho naivaṁ śhochitum arhasi

जातस्य हि ध्रुवो मृत्युर्ध्रुवं जन्म मृतस्य च |
तस्मादपरिहार्येऽर्थे न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि || 27||
jātasya hi dhruvo mṛityur dhruvaṁ janma mṛitasya cha
tasmād aparihārye ’rthe na tvaṁ śhochitum arhasi

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
And even if you take It [Atman/Self] to be always being born and always dying, then O Mahabaho! [mighty-armed; Arjuna]! - even then you cannot grieve of the Self. This is because: one who has been born – it is certain that that person will die. Therefore, it is not appropriate for you to grieve over these inevitable matters.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Even if you let go of your sadhana-acquired Knowledge of the Eternity of the Self, and take up the samsaric practice of thinking that It (Atman/Self) is always born and always dies – even then, it is not right for you to grieve. This is because: being born means that one has to die, and again, if one dies, then one has to be born. This is the absolutely pure truth. What are “birth” and “death”? Taking on the covering of name and form by Consciousness is “birth”; being without that covering is “Liberation.” And, not being careful at the time of extinguishing one's last breath, and thereby causing a change in the “covering,” is called “death.” That very covering is the body. That [body] is of three types: physical, subtle and causal. The physical body: is built by the quintuplicated [separated] five primal elements, made to contain/store bhoga [worldly partaking], and endowed with the six mutations [physical constituents] – meaning: it is the body made of bones, flesh etc. The subtle body: is built by the non-quintuplicated [unseparated] five primal elements, made for the contemplation of bhoga [desiring, rejecting] and is conjoined to the “saptadasha kalaas” [seventeen functionalities]. (Five organs of perception, five organs of action, five pranas, mind and intellect – these seventeen are called “saptadasha kalaas.”) Even though the physical body lies unmoving in bed during the time of sleep, the body that carries on the activities of dreams – that is what is known as the “subtle body.” And the causal body is nothing but the Avidya [Primal Ignorance] form causing these two [aforementioned] bodies, or the “seed.” Just before death, the jiva becomes devoid of physical-external consciousness and abides in the subtle body. At that time, all of the acts that the jiva has done present themselves in front of him/her and they get ready to produce their fruits. At this time, all of the pure, Truth-directed acts of the sadhana-perfected yogi shine forth the Light of Consciousness (like the light and heat of the sun dispelling fog) and destroy all of the coverings. Thus, the sadhak attains Liberation – meaning: all of the bodies are cast off together right at the same time of casting off the physical body, and that sadhak never has to take on another body again. But the non-sadhak, or the sadhak who has not yet attained perfection, because of being bound to karma, is not able to see the Light of Consciousness at this time, and only goes on seeing the matters of sound and sight and such [sensory matters]. That jiva is not able to cut through or destroy the covering[s]. Therefore, even though that jiva casts of the physical body, the subtle and causal bodies remain. Then that jiva, traveling in a dream-like state with all of the vrittis [active components] of the senses and attached to samskaras, goes on to move through/examine all of the vrittis and samskaras like an “AkAshastha nirAlamba vayubhoota” [supportless, airy spirit in space]. This is verily the post-death [of the physical body] state of that jiva. But, just as: when a seed falls on the field, it becomes the form of a tree through the help of time – in the same way, jiva-consciousness, which is inside the “field” of the forms of the subtle and causal bodies, in due time and according to the samskaras – meaning: the habitual general state of consciousness that was being experienced at the time of death – that jiva again takes on a physical body according to that general state of consciousness. This is verily that jiva's rebirth. Thus, for as long as the covering is not completely removed by the totally eliminating karma – for that long does the jiva continue to take on and cast off bodies in that way – meaning: birth and death continue to happen. This birth and death are of two types: of the breath, and of the body. By taking in the breath, one supports life, and at the end of having it and experiencing it, one has to let it go. This “taking in” and “letting go” of the breath is called the “birth” and “death”, respectively, of the breath. As long as there is life, for so long does this flow of the birth and death of the breath continue. As well, in just the same way, as long as there is “jiva-ness,” for that long does the flow of the “birth and death of the body” continue. The jiva takes on one body, at the end of partaking in it, it casts off that [body]. And in order to experience the [fruits of the] accumulated mass of karmas, it again takes on a new body. Just as, upon having taken on life, the breath has to be inhaled and exhaled until that life ends – in that same way, until the end of “jiva-ness” (by the finishing of the mass of accumulated karmas), one has to take on and cast off bodies. This is inevitable. Therefore, it is not appropriate for you to grieve over inevitable matters.