### Prose 
 --- 
यान्ति देवव्रता देवान्पितॄ न्यान्ति पितृव्रता: |
भूतानि यान्ति भूतेज्या यान्ति मद्याजिनोऽपि माम् ||25||
yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝīn yānti pitṛi-vratāḥ
bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Those who worship gods get gods. Those who worship ancestors get ancestors. Those who worship the elements/spirits get the elements/spirits. Those who worship Me, attain Me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Whenever any work is done once, the power that comes from that action is to do that same work in exactly the same way [again]. Doing this many times makes that a habit. When that habit becomes deeper, it ends up being a “samskara” [impressed tendency]. The work of samskara is to automatically make something happen without one being able to help doing it. The samsaric antahkarana does not know anything other than samskara. If I worship a god, then the samskara of that god blends into my antahkarana [aggregate of inner operators of personal consciousness]. At the time of leaving the body [death], that god appears in the mind. And if one leaves the body while one has that god in mind, then one has to go to the plane of that god, see the form of that god, and experience the entirety of that god. Similarly, those who pray for the plane of the ancestors, the samskaras of the plane of the ancestors become firmly impressed in their antahkarana, and after the end of the body [death], they have to experience that plane. Those who worship/sacrifice for the elements/spirits and such, their antahkarana goes about traveling in the yonis of the five elements. These worshipers of gods, ancestors and elements/spirits have to return – meaning: they go on suffering in the cycle of birth and death. But those who are “matyajee” – meaning: those who worship “I”, they get “I”, merge with “I”, and become “I”. They have no return [to the cycle of birth and death].
 
Dear sadhak! Think! When you first began sadhana [meditation practice], at that time – all of that business you did before with outer bodies – didn’t those bodies go into your chitta [personal consciousness] and appear as energy-bodies of those beings, and draw the focus of your chitta [in meditation]? Even though those bodies [in energy-versions] have form, they do not cast shadows. They are gods. Those from whom no shadows are cast – they are the ones who are gods. And the times when so many dead people are seen [in meditation] – they are of the plane of ancestors. And again, so many incredible, previously unseen – forms which we have not ever seen in this lifetime, perhaps we have heard about them – strange and weird bodies come in front [in meditation] – they are called “bhoota[s]” [ghosts; spirits]. And the word “bhoota” also means “element[s]”: earth, water, fire, air and space. These also can be seen. The first thing that comes to the mind, and comes greatly, during the time of sitting in Kriya – for that day’s Kriya it is usually the image of that thing that plays in the antahkarana, and thus does not allow one to rise above the chitta [fourth stage of the antahkarana]. If one leaves the body during that time and has one of these things [in consciousness], then, in that case, for as long as one has to remain in the unexpressed state [after death] – meaning: until rebirth happens again – for that long does one have to experience that particular plane [of that aforementioned thing in consciousness] and gather power [according to that thing]. Later, due to that particular power that has been gathered, one has to become the expresser of those qualities [with which one left the previous life and experienced in the unseen realms], and then take birth and dress up as a player in the game of samsara. This is for certain. And similarly, another just as certain thing today is that if you rise up through the middle of the brahmanadi, pierce and cross the chitta and fall into “I” and you leave the body during this kind of time, then you will never have to come back again. You will become “I”.