### Prose 
 --- 
यो मां पश्यति सर्वत्र सर्वं च मयि पश्यति |
तस्याहं न प्रणश्यामि स च मे न प्रणश्यति || 30||
yo māṁ paśhyati sarvatra sarvaṁ cha mayi paśhyati
tasyāhaṁ na praṇaśhyāmi sa cha me na praṇaśhyati

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The one who sees Me in all phenomena and all phenomena in Me – for that being I am never gone (unseen), and that being is also never gone (unseen) for Me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The sadhak, upon having attained realization and having arrived at the final border of sadhana, if the sadhak so wishes, can merge in Brahman and become “sadasattat paraṃ yat – ekamevadviteeyaṃ” [That, which is beyond good and evil – One without a second] in the Formless; and again, not merging, the sadhak can be like one who worships the Self as the Lord in a Form. Both are within the sadhak's command. The first state is the way of “Advaita” [non-duality] followers and the second state is the way of “Vishistadvaita” [conditional non-duality] followers. In this sloka, both states have been addressed. That [explanation] follows. When the vision of “all is the 'same'” and the perception of “no differences” are attained, the yogi merges in the Supreme Self and becomes Eternally Free. Then the “both-ness” disappears and only a non-dual “I” remains. Therefore, one does not have to cover Him with Me, and Me with Him. Because both come to an end and become One. “That” and “Thou” merge and become One “I”. The yogi's “I” and the yogi's “Him” unite and become One – this State has no end. (This is the direction of Advaita.) When the vision of “all is the 'same'” and the perception of “no differences” are attained, the yogi becomes Eternally United with the Supreme Self or the Supreme God. Both [the yogi and the Lord] remain locked in the attraction of each other. Thus, the yogi's pure and subtle perception is awake at all times, and because that perception is not covered by any covering, the Supreme Lord is always present in front of the yogi's eyes. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is captivated by the yogi's Awareness-Devotion and keeps the current of His Blessings always there for that yogi. The Lord does not remove His Blessings from the yogi even for a fraction of a moment. To sum it up, both become the Same. (This is the direction of “Vishistadvaita.”)