### Prose 
 --- 
अर्जुन उवाच |
सन्न्यासस्य महाबाहो तत्त्वमिच्छामि वेदितुम् |
त्यागस्य च हृषीकेश पृथक्केशिनिषूदन || 1||
arjuna uvācha
sannyāsasya mahā-bāho tattvam ichchhāmi veditum
tyāgasya cha hṛiṣhīkeśha pṛithak keśhi-niṣhūdana

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Arjuna said: “O Hrishikesh [Sri Krishna]! O Mahabahu [mighty-armed; Sri Krishna] Keshinisudan [slayer of Keshin; Sri Krishna]! I want to know the truth/knowledge about ‘sannyas’ [renunciation] and ‘tyaga’ [casting off attachments and such] and their differences.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
The subjects that have been spoken about in the [Bhagavad] Gita-scripture from Chapter One to Chapter Seventeen – all of that is being discussed in a summarized form – or, [in other words,] a recapitulation is being done – here in this Chapter Eighteen. The word “yoga” points to two states – one is the state of “sannyas” and another is “tyaga.” Usually, it is accepted that if someone is a “sannyasi” or a “tyagi” – that both mean the same thing. Is that really true, or is there some difference between these? To know this very thing, the question arose in the sadhak’s [aspirant’s] mind. O Keshinisudan [slayer of Keshin; Sri Krishna] – the word “kesh” [hair] means “covering hairs” – that which covers up. “Keshinisudan” – meaning: the One Who is Self-revealed, the destroyer of the power that covers up knowledge. Questions are born of ignorance. In order to destroy that ignorance, [the Lord] has been addressed as “Keshinisudan” – meaning: the Slayer of “daitya[s]” [demon[s]]. “Daitya” [of the lineage of “Diti”] refers to the corrupted kshatriyas [warriors]. The state of performing Kriya is the sadhak’s state of “kshatriya.” “KshatAt trAyate iti kshatriyah” [one who delivers one from destruction/harm is “kshatriya]. “Kshata” [wound; harm] is “incompleteness.” The one who is delivered from this incompleteness and makes effort to become complete – that is the one who is called “kshatriya.” In this state of kshatriya – meaning: due to a question arising during the performance of Kriya, [the situation] became corrupted. To destroy this corruption, the sadhak surrendered to Vishnu – meaning: looked toward one’s own Awareness. By doing so, all of the senses stopped, and they were no longer able to keep the sadhak enslaved in their powers. That is why the word “Hrishikesh” is used. “Hrishikesh” [Director/Ruler of the senses] = “hrishika” (means “of all of the senses”) + “eesh” (Director/Ruler). In this state, the effort to understand the deeper meanings of “sannyas” and “tyaga” is being made. O Mahabahu (Mighty-armed; Sri Krishna)! (Whatever there is to know is under the dominion of Self-Awareness. That is why the word “Mahabahu” is being used.) Explain to me the essential truth of sannyas and tyaga [their difference[s]). 