### Prose 
 --- 
तत्र सत्त्वं निर्मलत्वात्प्रकाशकमनामयम् |
सुखसङ्गेन बध्नाति ज्ञानसङ्गेन चानघ || 6||
tatra sattvaṁ nirmalatvāt prakāśhakam anāmayam
sukha-saṅgena badhnāti jñāna-saṅgena chānagha

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Anagh (sinless one) [Arjuna]! Among those three gunas, sattva guna is revealing (illuminating) due to its clarity/purity, and it is “anaamaya” [peaceful]. Thus, it binds through the association of contentment/pleasure and [mental] knowledge.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Among those three gunas, sattva is clear/pure, is the illuminator of everything and is peaceful. That is why it brings together “sukha” [contentment/pleasure] (“su” = “sundar” [beautiful] + “kha” = void – meaning: with a pain-free experiential state), and “jnana” [knowing; ascertaining] – meaning: “I am happy; I am a knowledgeable one” and such mental movements are born. This coming together [of contentment/pleasure and knowledge] is called “oppression” or “bondage.” This [is called bondage] because I am actually nothing but the conflict-free Great and nothing else at all. Thus, there is the putting up of some other non-substance called “contentment/pleasure” and bringing it [apparently] into the “I”, the “I” in which there is no place for anything to come. And there is the mixing together [of “I”] with [mental] knowledge as well. This delusion of losing one’s true awareness – this is indeed bondage.

The word “jnana” has [the letters] “j”, “gn” [no Roman alphabet equivalent to the original Sanskrit], “a” [long], and “na” – these four letters. Among these, the meaning of the letter “j” means: “jaayamaan” – meaning: everything that is of emergence-preservation-destruction – those. And “gn” means the “essence of smell” – meaning: that which reveals the actions of the five tanmatras [elemental sources] – sound, touch, sight, taste, smell – mixed together – that. These two letters [“j” and “gn”] together make “jna” [no real equivalent in the Roman alphabet to the Sanskrit original]. The meaning of this “jna” sound is: everything that is within the realm of emergence-preservation-destruction-sound-touch-sight-taste-smell. The letter “a” [long] means “aasakti” [addiction; attachment] and the letter “na” means “naasti” [negation]. Thus we have: the state where there is no addiction/attachment to anything of emergence-preservation-destruction-sound-touch-sight-taste-smell is that which is called “jnana.” That which makes one enjoined to this “jnana” – that is that which is called “sattva guna.” Now, dear sadhak, understand how the bondage is when pleasure and knowledge come together.