### Prose 
 --- 
श्रेयो हि ज्ञानमभ्यासाज्ज्ञानाद्ध्यानं विशिष्यते |
ध्यानात्कर्मफलत्यागस्त्यागाच्छान्तिरनन्तरम् || 12||
śhreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj jñānād dhyānaṁ viśhiṣhyate
dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas tyāgāch chhāntir anantaram

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
(When there is no discernment/insight), knowledge is certainly greater than practice; meditation is greater than knowledge; the renunciation of the fruits of actions is greater than meditation. Peace comes only after this type of renunciation. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
When there is no discernment/insight, there is sternness in practice, but there is no stability. And then again, although knowledge with discernment/insight is dry/feelingless, there is stability. This – practice and knowledge – when looking at meditation in comparison to these two, this can be understood: the union of the sadhak [meditator] to the object of meditation – both of their forms becoming one is called “dhyan” [meditation]. In this “dhyan,” the joy of union, and the tenderness of love born of the union are both verily present. In this, struggle and feelinglessness are both absent. As soon as the object of meditation and the meditator become one – in the vortex of that oneness, karma [action] and karmaphala [the fruits of action] both come to a final rest. That final rest of karma is that which is called “tyaga” [renunciation; casting off]. When there is “tyaga,” there is Endless Peace. This Peace is that which is called the “no- mind settledness,” or the “Settledness in Brahman.” That is why I am saying: knowledge is greater than practice; meditation is greater than knowledge – the meditation that has no struggle and no feelingless-ness either, yet, through the happiness born of renunciation combined with the fruits of knowledge, meditation gives one the attainment of the Settledness in Brahman, which is Peace Itself. The sadhak is seeing that it is as fruitless as “breasts hanging from the throat of a goat” [simile from an archaic time] to make up a path by oneself without laying one’s head at the feet of sadguru. On the other hand, even a little bit of wisdom from guru bears good fruit in sadhana [spiritual practice]. Gradually, that wisdom brings one to the state of meditation and brings about even more greatness. Later, when the state of samadhi comes forth, then action and the fruits of actions automatically come to their final rest. That is what is called “tyaga” [renunciation]. It is in that “tyaga” that Peace presides. 