### Prose 
 --- 
मृत्यु: सर्वहरश्चाहमुद्भवश्च भविष्यताम् |
कीर्ति: श्रीर्वाक्च नारीणां स्मृतिर्मेधा धृति: क्षमा || 34||
mṛityuḥ sarva-haraśh chāham udbhavaśh cha bhaviṣhyatām
kīrtiḥ śhrīr vāk cha nārīṇāṁ smṛitir medhā dhṛitiḥ kṣhamā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
I am the all-destroying death as well. I am also the cause of the emergence of the living beings yet to come. Among women, I am renown, beauty/gloriousness, speech, memory, intelligence, steadfastness and patience/tolerance as well.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Mṛtyuh sarvarashchAham [I am the all-destroying death] – from the creator Brahmaa to inert matter and everything in creation – the aggregate of all of that is that which is called “sarva” [all]. The power through which this “all” is destroyed – meaning: when the transmutation of visage, state and place take place – that is that which is called “mrityu” [death]. Nothing escapes the hand of this death. Everything in this cosmic shell is under its power. It is due to its power that the Para and Apara Prakriti’s union is endlessly being destroyed (broken up). At the time of dissolution, this destruction-activity becomes intensely strong and destroys everything at once. This is why it is said that death is “the total destruction” or “the all-destroying.” This is that which is God’s Power of annihilation – the operation of tamoguna. Thus, it is a Divine Glory. That is why it has been said that “I” am the total-destruction-death. Udbhavashcha bhaviShyatAm [and those that emerge in the future] – after everything is destroyed at dissolution via that annihilating power in the form of total-destruction-death, the power by which the operations of creation begin again – that power is called “the power that is the cause of creation,” [or] “the power that is the cause of emergence.” Thus, it is also a Divine Glory. And for this reason, “I” am the emergence of the living beings who are to come in the future, after dissolution. Keertih shreervAk cheti [renown, prosperity, speech and such] – in these operations of creation and destruction by God – in this activity there is present a Shakti [Intelligent Power] that is responsible for settled existence. This [Power] is His power of maintaining – the operation of sattva guna. This Maintaining Shakti of His has seven powers, and She, the Mahashakti Goddess of sattva guna, is maintaining the order of the entire cosmos. Those seven powers are – “keerti” [renown], “shree,” [beauty/gloriousness], “vak” [speech], “smriti” [memory], “medha” [intelligence] and “kshama” [patience/tolerance].
Keerti [renown] – refers to the fame of dead people. This Mahashakti [great power] rules from the abode of desire below the Svadhisthan to the Muladhar. All of the desires that there are in samsara – she is the maintainer of all of those. Whatever it is that a human being does that is under the power of desire, whether good or bad – that remains after the end of the body (like lineage continuation being preserved). That is that which is called “keerti.” Shree [beauty/gloriousness] – refers to the one whom everyone serves. The one who is prior to deities, guru, gurus’ residence, certain places, the lords of those places, perfections, the right to perfection [and such] – this Holy Goddess is called “Shree.” She is the greatest Goddess ruling over sattva guna. Her playground is in the sushumna at the Svadhisthan. Wherever Her activities are – She makes them flourish. VAk [speech] – refers to the sounds produced by thought. The expression of [vocal] sound is produced due to fire-energy. Thus, this ruler of sound, the goddess of speech, presides in the Manipur-chakra, the abode of fire-energy. Smriti [memory] – refers to the remembrance of previously done things. This Mahashakti sports in all four parts of the antahkarana (mind, intellect, ego and chitta [personal consciousness]). Her playground is the “manomaya kosha” [mental sheath] at the Anahata-chakra. Medha [intelligence] – that in which all of the perspectives of the worldly experience (the perspectives of sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), through having experienced them many times, remain imprinted – that is called “medha” [learned intelligence] or “smaran-shakti” [active power from memory]. Her operations need to take place in a purified place, and therefore, her place of residence is in the Vishuddha-chakra (in the abode of space). Dhṛti [forbearance] – the power of holding fast. Her abode is the Ajnachakra. KshamA [patience; tolerance] – the power of patience. “BAhye vAdhyAtmake chaiva duhkhe chodpAdite kvachit; na kupyati na vA hanti sA kshamA parikeertitA” [displaying no anger, abuse or infliction towards the one who causes physical or mental grief – that is called “kShamA”]. She resides at the Sahasrar. Because these seven Mahashaktis are preserving the body of the jiva [individual person] as a mother would, they are the glorious ones among all “stree[s]” [female[s]] (women). Glories are actually established in “I”. Thus, because they [the Mahashaktis] are actually My Glories, they are “I”.