### Prose 
 --- 
वेदानां सामवेदोऽस्मि देवानामस्मि वासव: |
इन्द्रियाणां मनश्चास्मि भूतानामस्मि चेतना || 22||
vedānāṁ sāma-vedo ’smi devānām asmi vāsavaḥ
indriyāṇāṁ manaśh chāsmi bhūtānām asmi chetanā

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Among all of the vedas I am the Sama Veda. Among the gods I am “Vasav” [also known as “Indra”]. I am the mind among the sense-organs, and I am consciousness within living beings and phenomena.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Veda = jnana [knowledge]; whatever there is to be known – that is “Veda.” Among the vedas, the Sama Veda is the joining point – the coming together of Maya and Brahman. Its [Sama Veda’s] place is the Ajna-chakra (see commentary to Chapter 2, sloka 5 [of the Pranab Gita]). There is complete revelation here. That is why, among the vedas, “I” am Sama Veda.
 
VAsav[a] [head of the demi-gods; Indra] – “vAs” + “av[a]” – meaning: the one who resides in heaven – he is Vasav. “Svarga” [heaven; levels] means “level[s].” There are two levels in creation. One is of bondage, and the other is of Freedom. Between these two, there is an aisle called “chitta” [higher mind; personal consciousness]. In the level below chitta, due to the dominance of the three gunas, there is the bound “jiva-ness” [personal entity-ness]. From below, however much one progresses [upwards] towards the veil of chitta, that much freedom from “jiva-ness” does that person experience. And again, there are two more levels above chitta. There is a level between chitta and Vivasvan [see commentary to Chapter 4:1-2 of the Pranab Gita], and there is another level above Vivasvan. Above the chitta is the residing place for those who are still controlled [by lower powers]. Some are controlled by chitta, some by Prakriti, some by Maya – like this. These beings can go about both above and below chitta, yet they are not bound like jivas [samsaric souls]. However, they do not have the power or right to go to the level above Vivasvan. And[, among these beings who can go above and below chitta,] those who are below – even those who are residents of the levels of ego, intellect, mind, senses, worldly experiences etc. are also called “swarga- [heaven-] dwellers.” It is seen like this: the worldly person in the worldly experience, the “muni” [mental sage] in the mind, the Buddhist in buddhi [intellect], the “ahamkari” [I-worshipper] (follower of “so’hang/so’ham” [I am That]) etc. Among them, one who is residing in chitta but has attained the power to go above chitta and has established him/herself somewhat higher – it is that being that is called “Indra” or “Vasav.” The state above Ajna is the karma-less state of enjoying the fruits, or the state of the gods. Whatever kinds of “states of the gods” that the “I” has – among them, that “Vasav-state” is primary. The full manifestation of “I” in the “states of the gods” is in “Vasav.” That is why it has been said, “I am ‘Vasav.’”
 
IndriyANAṃ manashchAsmi – among the sense-organs, I am “mind.” There are eleven sense-organs. Five are the organs of perception. These take the outer experiences of sound, touch, sight, taste and scent and bring it to “I”. Five are organs of action. The organs of action make the “I” – which is made restless by the worldly experiences of sight, taste and such – do work outside. Besides these, there is another sense-organ. That organ is called “mind.” This mind makes the “I” experience the worldly life and makes it do work as well – meaning: activating desire, feeling, thought – all of these things within – makes one run about with actions outside. The true form of this bi-directional sense-organ is verily that which is known as “mind.” And “I” am that.
 
Mana [mind] – “ma” = “I” + “na” = “am not” – meaning: “I am not.” The “I” that is among the sense-organs – that is the “false ‘I’.” But among these, the mind that is “I am not” – that [“I am not”] is the real “I”. Now let us see which mind is the “I am not”-mind among the aggregate of the sense-organs.
 
Indriya [sense-organs] – “i” + “ndra” + “i” + “ya”; “i” = power; “ndra” = fire; “i” = power; “ya” = something that is itself. In “indriya[s]” [sense-organ[s]], “fire-power” and “power-itself” are found. The nature of “fire-power” is this: whatever falls into fire, fire transforms that into its own form and quality. Whatever fire touches – fire first illuminates that thing, then it makes it heated, and in the end what remains is only a sign/remnant – blackness and ashes. Similarly, whichever worldly experience comes and falls into the fire-power of the sense-organs – first that experience is illuminated within [experienced]; then a pressure or movement is felt; and later only a samksara [impression] of that worldly experience remains. Here we have seen one part of “indriya,” the work of  “fire-power” or “indra.” Now let us see the work of the other part – “iya” or “power-itself.”
 
In all of the workings of each of the sense-organs, the experience “I am doing; I am seeing” – this kind of thing that is happening – the “I” that is in this – that is the “false ‘I’.” This “I” is endowed with beginningless samskaras. It is this “I” that experiences pleasure and pain, health and illness, old age and death. It is this “I” that, having fallen into seeing and hearing and such, that is ever growing and ever being nurtured, and being a happy or sad one. But the “power-itself” that accompanies “fire-power” – meaning: the “i” + “ya” that is enjoined there [in the sense organs] – that has no change. That [“power-itself”] does not hold anything or anyone, nor does it cast off anyone or anything. This “power-itself” ever presides in state of Stillness and Peace. This “power-itself” is not “I”, instead, because there is nothing in this “power-itself” that knows itself as “I”, this “power-itself” is called “I am not” – or “mind.”
 
The reason for calling this “power-itself” “I am not” or “mind” is this: “fire-power” or the “false ‘I’” goes around being restless at all times due to being with falsehood. If there was no “power-itself” or the still “I” at the root of “fire-power” – if there is no unmoving thing at the root of every movement, then on what will the waves float? Similarly, the game of the “false ‘I’” – the beginningless current of the breaking down and building up of the samskara-bundles – is taking place on top of the “power-itself” in the form of “I am not.” All pleasure and pain are in this [“false ‘I’” or “fire-power”]. However, at the root is the real “I” – the still, peaceful “power-itself.” That which people say “I”, “I”, to which they become attached, and for which they become overcome by grief – that is the “false ‘I’.” Thus, it is being said here that among the senses, it is “mind” or the “I am not” that is the real “I”. [Translators’ note: The following two sentences are difficult to understand unless one knows the Sanskrit alphabet, its specific sounds and their energetic purport. It is being translated here as is, so that the work is true to the original.] The short “i” – representing the lesser power – is being used here because [the Lord] is speaking about the Divine Manifestations in the particular. If the Manifestations were spoken about in the macrocosmic sense, the greater power would have been represented.
 
BhootAnAmasmi chetanA – I am the consciousness in living beings and phenomena. “Bhoot” – that which goes. Everything in creation that can be seen, heard, done, felt – all of that goes away. Nothing stays. All of that is “bhoot” [phenomena; past]. All of that is Prakriti. All of that is material. Within them, “I” am “chetana” [consciousness]. “Chetana” – “chet” + “a” + “na.” “Chet” means “if” – meaning: uncertain. What is uncertain? Oh but “a”. “A” means “asat” [false; bad; wrongness] – meaning: whatever is of the six attributes such as “asti jAyate” etc. [see footnote 5 in Chapter 8 of the Pranab Gita] – all of that. And “na” means “not.” Therefore, the word “chetana” means whatever is not of the uncertain, not of the six-attribute-endowed – that. In other words, the Certain Thing is “I”.