### Prose 
 --- 
अनन्याश्चिन्तयन्तो मां ये जना: पर्युपासते |
तेषां नित्याभियुक्तानां योगक्षेमं वहाम्यहम् || 22||
ananyāśh chintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsate
teṣhāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣhemaṁ vahāmyaham

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The people who, with single-mindedness, worship Me while continuously thinking of Me – I bring to these ever-united ones security and prosperity/acquisitions.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The dharma of the chitta [personal consciousness] is to think/contemplate. When that chitta thinks of no one else except “I” – that is when the single-minded contemplation of “I” happens. Those who forget about samsara and remain in stillness in “I”, they are “abhiyukta” [fearlessly united] in the Eternal (meaning: in “I”). “Abhi” = fearlessness; “yukta” = to become united/joined – meaning: one is joined/united to “I” and becomes fearless. This is because there is no limitation in “I”. It is only in the samsara-state of the sadhak that there is limitedness. Thus, being still in “I”, that limitedness leaves the sadhak and there is the attainment of Unlimitedness. Fear is only of death. That is erased. If one stays like this regularly, the Lord Himself takes on the responsibility for “yoga” [acquisitions] and “kshema” [security] of the sadhak. Yoga is the attainment of the unattained. Now, “matsaṃsthAṃ shAntim” [Peace united with Me] is the thing that is to be attained by the sadhak. There is nothing else to get. (See commentary to Chapter 6, slokas 15 and 22.) Thus, “matsaṃsthAṃ shAnti” is “yoga” [that which is attained]. And “kshema” is the securing of the attained thing. If there is single-minded contemplation of “I”, then the sadhak has no concerns at all. There is no need to make effort to have “matsaṃsthAm shanti” (the State of the Self) either. And after getting it, no effort is needed to secure it either. This is so because then the sadhak is “bhaagyavan” [fortunate/blessed], and therefore, “Bhagavan” [the One Who is Fortune/Blessings] bears the sadhak’s load.