### Prose 
 --- 
न मे विदु: सुरगणा: प्रभवं न महर्षय: |
अहमादिर्हि देवानां महर्षीणां च सर्वश: || 2||
na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ prabhavaṁ na maharṣhayaḥ
aham ādir hi devānāṁ maharṣhīṇāṁ cha sarvaśhaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The gods do not know My Origin, neither do the “maharshi[s]” [great seer[s]]. This is because I AM before all gods and great sages.

### Commentary 
 --- 
That “I” which is on the upper side of “Vivasvan” [see commentary to 4:1-2 of the Pranab Gita] – the gods do not know that. That is because they are enjoyers of the fruits of karma [acts; rites]. They are not “karmi[s]” [spiritual practitioners; those who do the spiritual act]. “Maharshi[s]” [great seers] are those who know the three phases of time, who completely know the created cosmos. They too, do not know that state of Mine. Why is it that they [gods and “maharshis”] do not know? Take a look and see why. If you stay with the enquiry into the three phases of time and samsara, then you will have to remain as a practitioner of the dharma of the chitta [dharma of the personal consciousness]. You will not be able to go above. If one wants to go above, the enjoyment of the fruits of karma and the power of enquiry will have to be left behind, and they [karmic fruits and enquiry] will remain in the field of the chitta [personal consciousness]. When you withdrew your “I” from Maya and experienced these [following] things: the revelation of Vivasvan at the field where “I” and Maya separate, and the putting forth of the reflection of Vivasvan onto the chitta – at that time you understood that these experiences cannot be touched by those who follow the dharma of the chitta. That is because these are realities that are far above the chitta. And the True “I” is even above these. It is because you are a “karmi” [spiritual practitioner; doer of the spiritual act] that these [matters above the chitta] were experienced by you through “karma” (Kriya). But, as the “maharshis” are always abiding in matters that bless the world, they do not grasp the state of the Upper “I”. But that does not mean that you should come to the conclusion that they [the “maharshis” – great seers] do not have the ability to grasp That “I”. In any case, “I” Am prior to the great sages and gods.