### Prose 
 --- 
योगस्थ: कुरु कर्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा धनञ्जय |
सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्यो: समो भूत्वा समत्वं योग उच्यते || 48||
yoga-sthaḥ kuru karmāṇi saṅgaṁ tyaktvā dhanañjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoḥ samo bhūtvā samatvaṁ yoga uchyate

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Dhananjaya [Arjuna]! Being “yogastha” (established in the place of yoga) and knowing attainment and non-attainment as one and the same, act without having any associations. To “make one” is that which is called “yoga.”

### Commentary 
 --- 
The place where action and non-action come together is called “yogasthan” [place of yoga]. This place is the Kuta in the Ajna. When attention becomes still at the Kuta, one is able to be “yogastha” [established in the place of yoga]. Upon continuously moving prana in the canal of the sushumna according to the instructions of guru, at the end the support-less non-doing state comes about spontaneously. That is the attainment of action. Not having that happen is non-attainment. “Whether attainment happens or not, I have the right to act. Let me do the act.” Taking up action with determination and this kind of unattached feeling is what makes attainment and non-attainment one and the same (this state is known by oneself in sadhana). And, without touching anything on the sides, only offering prana in the brahmanadi according to the instructions of guru – when this is done, one casts off associations. Keeping attention steady at Kutastha and not giving mind to result or non-result, and only abiding in the Sky of Brahman, a state of oneness comes about – meaning: the breath goes into equilibrium and, becoming more and more subtle, becomes still. As well, the mind goes past the Kuta and immerses itself in the “Bindu Sarovar” [Bindu Lake]. No awareness (conception) of anything else remains. This state of oneness is, verily, that which is called “yoga.”