### Prose 
 --- 
द्यावापृथिव्योरिदमन्तरं हि
व्याप्तं त्वयैकेन दिशश्च सर्वा: |
दृष्ट्वाद्भुतं रूपमुग्रं तवेदं
लोकत्रयं प्रव्यथितं महात्मन् || 20||
dyāv ā-pṛithivyor idam antaraṁ hi
vyāptaṁ tvayaikena diśhaśh cha sarvāḥ
dṛiṣhṭvādbhutaṁ rūpam ugraṁ tavedaṁ
loka-trayaṁ pravyathitaṁ mahātman

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Great Spirit! It is You Who pervade this “antar” [inner part] (“antareeksha” [part within]) “svarga” [heaven] and “prithivi” [earth], as well as every direction that there is. I am seeing that the three planes are quite stunned (afraid) upon witnessing this terrible and astonishing Form of Yours.

### Commentary 
 --- 
The place where the gods live – meaning: during the time of meditation, the place where the sadhak sees luminous forms that have no shadows – that is the place called “svarga” [heaven]. The sound “svr” means “making sound” (“svara” [musical tones]), and “gai” means “to do ‘gaana’” [to sing]. Upon the driving of prana-vayu (by the guruinstructed method), the place from where the seven “svaras” [musical tones] are heard – it is that place that is called “svarga.” (It can be known through sadhana.) And the place of action – meaning: the residing place for those who carry physical bodies [embodied beings] is called “prithivi” [earth]. And the space between these two – meaning: the void-abode – that is called “antareeksha” [the part within]. “Antar” means the inner part – meaning: the place in the middle [of some area], “eeksha” means “seeing.” Ohhh! Oh – oh – oh! In all of the ten directions [meaning: all around] of these three places, You are pervading as One. There is no place where You are not. There is no thing that is not You. O Great Spirit! I am seeing that those three abodes are full of great fear because of Your unimaginable (that which I have not seen before) and fierce (terrifying) Form. 