### Prose 
 --- 
त्रैगुण्यविषया वेदा निस्त्रैगुण्यो भवार्जुन |
निर्द्वन्द्वो नित्यसत्त्वस्थो निर्योगक्षेम आत्मवान् || 45||
trai-guṇya-viṣhayā vedā nistrai-guṇyo bhavārjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho niryoga-kṣhema ātmavān

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Arjuna, all Veda/s [alternative meaning: ascertainable knowledge] is/are about the matters connected to the three gunas [energetic qualities in all things and acts]. Therefore, by being without doubt, abiding always in truth [or: purity], unattached and abiding in the Self, be devoid of the three gunas.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Whatever is known – all are “veda” [ascertainable knowledge]. The Vedas [in this case – the scriptures] are divided into Rik, Yaju, Sama, Atharva – these four sections. These Vedas are actually about the matters of the three gunas [energetic qualities of all things physical and subtle]. “Rajah,” [alternate versions of the word: rajas; rajo; rajoguna] “sattva,” “tamah” [alternate versions of the word: tamas; tamo; tamoguna] – these are the three gunas. The aggregate of these is called “traigunya.” The dharma of rajas – activity; the result – suffering/pain (because one has to labor to simply do work). The dharma of sattva – revelation [or: light; manifestation] (that which happens on its own; the form of self awareness); the result – pleasure. The dharma of tamas – stability (end/destruction/annihilation); the result – delusion. The combined dharma of these three – the union of pleasure, pain and delusion; the result – joy. Just as the power for a seed to sprout does not come about without the combined help of water, air and heat – in the same way, if these three gunas remain separate from each other, they cannot just do their own particular activities and still manifest. It is by the mixing of the three together that each's activities come forth. But if in that combination the proportion of each one is the same, then no activity at all happens. A state of equilibrium comes about. Activities come forth only when the proportions are unequal.
 
At the Muladhar, tamas finishes, sattva begins and there is the full manifestation of rajas. In the Svadhisthan, rajas is 12/16 in proportion, sattva is 4/16 in proportion. At the Manipur, rajas and sattva are in equal proportions. (See Illustration No. 3 [in the Introduction].) Immediately upon crossing past the Manipur, the proportion of rajas becomes progressively and increasingly lower in comparison to the proportion of sattva. Thus, the part that is predominantly rajas-powered is the area between the Muladhar to the Manipur. When one sits to meditate, at first the activity-filled rajas takes over – meaning: one has to forcefully and determinedly drive prana in the environment of the collective causalities of the physical body. For as long as prana does not become subtle and thereby take the mind into the “vajra” [nadi], for that long will the activities of pranas be very strong; the mind will be restless; and at this time Kutastha remains clouded over. Whatever is visible – they are all kind of far, far away, like some things revealed by occasional flashes of lightning – like blurry shadows – these go on appearing in unclear ways – this is what is called “duhkha” [sorrow/pain] (“dure shunya” [nothing far away]). Afterwards, when one enters into the vajra and arrives at the Manipur, even though rajas and sattva are equal in proportion there (in duhkha) – in the middle of a sun-like sphere in the distant sky, a vision of a two-armed red form of Brahmi-Shakti as a girl – with a garland of rudraksha beads [or: with a rosary of rudraksha beads] and a water-pot, and sitting on a swan – is seen. At that time, all around there is a kind of scintillating, resonating atmosphere. If one puts one's hearing in that resonance, one experiences that there is some kind of thing being spoken/recited on the eastern side; — Begin Footnote. — Know that the front side of the body is east, the back side is west, the right side is south and the left side is north. — End Footnote. — it can be heard but nothing much can be discerned very well. It is like a toothless old man saying something very fast – who knows what – in another room on the other side of the wall – this kind of experience is had. Everything that is known/ascertained up to the Manipur in the pain-filled, rajas-powered, activity dominated field – all of that is the Rigveda [also called “Rik Veda,” among other variations] - “A” [the first letter of the Omkar/AUM]. That spoken sound that is heard – that is the Gayatri Mantra, and that goddess [seen in the sun-like sphere] is the presiding deity of the Rigveda - “Gayatri” - the first manifestation of Gayatri.

Upon piercing the Manipur and entering into the “chitra” [nadi], many colorful and wondrous visions can be seen. Piercing through the place of the eight-fold powers (the technique – Kriya – is known through the teachings of guru) and going above – there is the Anahata-chakra. In that Anahata, sattva is 12/16 in proportion; rajah is 4/16; and in the Vishuddha, sattva is 14/16 in proportion; rajah is 2/16. Naturally, because of rajah's intensity becoming softer, the proportion of sorrow is reduced and happiness arises. The inner sky becomes filled with light. The restlessness of mind and the intensity are gone. At this time “upasana” [worshipfulness] (“upa” = near; “asana” = settled place) goes on happening – meaning: because of the mind being so attracted to the various visions from the chitra, the interest in prana-kriya comes to an end, and thus the gap between the seen and seer is reduced and one comes near the place of spiritual awareness. Then, within the twelve-petaled lotus, another eight-petaled lotus blossoms forth. On that, in the middle of a sphere of light, the black, four-armed, three-eyed form of the Vaishnavi-Shakti as a young woman is seen, holding a conch-shell, a discus, a mace and a lotus [in each of the four hands] and seated on the mystical bird Garuda. Right along with the appearance of that vision, the Gayatri mantra can be heard clearly, in a soft and melodious vocalization – nearby on the right side (in the back of the right ear); this can be heard. After that, when that light is pierced via the inner shambhavi [mudra], in the blink of an eye, a sixteen-petaled lotus blossoms forth in the Vishuddha. In that, that same goddess again shows Herself, in an electric-lightning form, and then immediately disappears. Everything that is known in this sattva-powered, “upasana”-predominant, pleasure-filled field of the Anahata-Vishuddha – that is what is known as “Yajurveda” [also known as Yajur Veda, among other variations] - “U” [the second letter of the Omkar/AUM]. That is the goddess who is “Savitri” - the presiding deity of the Yajurveda – the second manifestation of Gayatri. Because She appears in a black form and then later in the electric-lightning-form, the Yajurveda is divided into two sections - “Krishnayajuh” [the dark Yajurveda] and “Shuklayajuh” [the bright Yajurveda].
 
Above the Vishuddha, the rajoguna becomes more and more weak until it reaches it weakest level and then finishes at the Ajna. Sattva is fully manifested at this Ajna, and it is the beginning of tamoguna. (See Illustration No. 3 [in the Introduction].) Amongst the three gunas, it is seen that the tamoguna is primary. This is because: (it can be seen in anuloma [see sloka 16 of this Chapter 2 for clarification of “anuloma”]) it is indeed on top of the completely pure tamoguna that the world-birthing Mahamaya [resides]; it is of course on top of the perfectly still foundation [pure tamas] that activity takes place [rajas]; and indeed, it is on top of the activity that there is revelation/light [sattva]; and again it is in the still foundation [tamas], indeed, that all come to rest.10 Although it [tamas] begins at Ajna, — Begin Footnote. — All three gunas are present everywhere; however, predominance can be seen to happen in twos. Where there is the predominance of rajas-tamah, there sattva, being covered up, is in an almost absent state. Where there is the predominance of rajah-sattva, there tamoguna is almost absent. And where there is the predominance of sattva-tamah, there the rajoguna is almost absent. — End Footnote. — it is present and spread everywhere in different proportions. It is that very presence [of tamas], becoming more and more substantial in the upwards direction, that becomes transformed into its own pure form at the Ajna. Here, a group of extraordinarily beautiful events is seen to be happening together. Within the light of pure sattva, [one experiences:] above and below – there are tamas and rajas, respectively, mixing together in their very subtle forms [with sattva] – here there is the coming together of stillness and activity at the same time. From the “mouth” of the conjunction of rajas-tamas area, there is the rising up of waves of musical sound playing according to the rules of “ragas” and “raginis” [melodic forms]; Pranava-Gayatri is sounding resonance after resonance; the Vedas and the sayings of the rishis [ancient sages] are being recited on the west side – all in very clear and wonderfully comely tones; gods, gandharvas [celestial beings], sages, spirits, demons, celestial musicians, planets, deities etc. - as if the entire Cosmos is acting out according to prescribed roles on a grand theater stage – the appearance of creation, preservation, destruction – the mind and heart are entranced, restlessness has disappeared – in short: “ihaikesthaṃ jagat kṛtsnaṃ sacharacharaṃ prakatita (“murtiman” [visible/manifested])” [the entire universe with all things moving and unmoving – visible/manifested here]. Whatever is known in this music-predominant, tamas-ruled place, the not delusional but spiritual trance-filled field of Ajna – all of that is verily Samaveda [also known as Sama Veda, among other variations] - “M” [the third letter of the Omkar/AUM]. When the attention is perfect in the bindu in the conjunction of the rajas-tamah, a supremely tenderly radiant, white two-armed form, with a trident, a damaru [hand drum], riding on a bull – the Raudri-Shakti as an old woman is seen. It is She who is the presiding deity of the Samaveda, the goddess “Sarasvati” - the third manifestation of Gayatri.

Within the sattva inside the Ajna, the place of conjunction of rajas and tamas is called “Kuta.” Within that Kuta, an incomparably beautiful and luminous bindu is seen. That is the Beginningless Maheshvara [Lord of the universe; Shiva]. From there, Sarasvati rises. From the mouth of Maheshvara, the ceaseless recitation of mantras from Vedas and such, with waves of particularly intoned sounds, is going on. It is from these mantras and such that the Mother of the Vedas, the Ajna to Muladhar pervading, Gayatri-Savitri-Sarasvati-Form – is appearing everywhere, resonating in activity via the rajoguna, and residing in the light-filled “grand sattva.” This is why She is [called]: “maheshvaravadanotpannA viShNohṛdayasambhavA brahmaNA samanujnAtA” [arising from the speech of Maheshvara, residing in the heart of Vishnu, and dear to Brahmaa [the creator aspect of the Godhead Trinity]]. In the functions and activities within the region spanning from the Ajna to the Muladhar, She manifests in three Forms, and is invoked in the bunching together of three verses in the “tripaad” [three-versed] mantra. That is why She is called “Tripada.” She has yet another verse. That fourth verse resides in the non-doing Sahasrar. The “Gayatri Mantra” that is learned during the thread ceremony of the brahmins – that is three-versed. The mantra that is taught/learned when taking sannyas [formal renunciation] – that is the fourth verse of Gayatri. Only the sannyasi [renunciate] has the right to the fourth verse, not those still attached to actions. This is because She cannot be known unless one pierces the Kutastha and arrives at the Sahasrar.
 
Right after crossing the Ajna after piercing Kutastha, rajoguna is finished and its influence is also ended gradually. Prana-kriya ends. The non-doing Sahasrar is revealed. Then the Tranquil, Revelatory Light of Knowledge shines forth. In that Light, the matters and happenings of past, future and present are seen and known. At this time, the Mother of the universe, the three-eyed Adya-Shakti, sometimes in the form of Purush and sometimes in the form of Prakriti, becomes pleased, and She tears apart the sadhak's delusional, duality-filled net of Maya, and bestows the Insight-Knowledge. The recitation of the Gayatri, now with the fourth verse as well, comes forth. (This can be heard on the north side.) From that fourth verse, sannyas [renunciation] comes into being – meaning: all of the celestial sounds finish completely into the one Pranava and a waveless, single-toned (non-fluctuating) unstruck Sound comes forth. From within this Sound, a Luminous Bindu blossoms forth. That is verily Taraka-Brahman. He has no limits at all. The mind becomes locked in Him. In this state, the vrittis of the senses become devoid of activity – meaning: the matters of the senses are there; the senses are there; yet there is no partaking – this type of state comes into being. At that time, spontaneously, one becomes nothing but a viewing witness to the matters of the universe, and one becomes completely imbued with the Eternal Bliss of Truth. This Bliss-filled state of Knowledge is the Atharvaveda [also known as Atharva Veda, among other variations] - “OM.” From the center of that Bindu, a Brilliantly Radiant Form appears. It is He Who is the Supreme Shiva, Narayana – the Niranjan Purush Who is beyond all fields.
 
All of these things that are directly known in the field spanning the Muladhar to the Sahasrar, that which is called “veda” [knowledge] – they are nothing but the work of the three gunas using the spreading power of inner sound. For as long as there is mind, for that long is the experience of the seen and the seer. All of this is the work of Maya; thus they are endowed with limitedness. For this reason, Sri Bhagavan [Sri Krishna] is saying, “O Arjuna! Be devoid of the three gunas” - meaning: that which happens when one becomes merged, after the mind gets locked in that Taraka-Brahman-Niranjan-Purush – become That Itself. That Merged State is verily the state of being devoid of the three gunas – Vishnu's Supreme State. [The Lord] is speaking about the signs during progress towards being devoid of the three gunas: 1) “atmavan” - abiding at the field of the Self; when there is no awareness of anything at all other than the worshipper “I” and the worshipped “I” - the state of non-doing; 2) “niryogakshema” - after that [“atmavan”] state comes, “yoga” - meaning: the thing to get – there is none of that left; “kshema” - meaning: there is not even the keeping of the received thing; past and future disappear and only the present remains; 3) “nityasatvasthah” - the brahmanadi that is within the sushumna, the space in its middle is called “nityasatva” [always pure]; this is beyond the fields and is the eternal place beyond the fields; it is in this place that – upon making the receiver and that which is to be received as one – the Niranjan-Purush shows Himself; 4) “nirdvandva” – upon arriving at the “nityasatva,” cold and heat, pleasure and pain, me and mine, I and you and such twoness ends and the mind is dissolved. This is that which is called the “State of Vishnu beyond the three gunas.”