### Prose 
 --- 
इहैव तैर्जित: सर्गो येषां साम्ये स्थितं मन: |
निर्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म तस्माद् ब्रह्मणि ते स्थिता: || 19||
ihaiva tair jitaḥ sargo yeṣhāṁ sāmye sthitaṁ manaḥ
nirdoṣhaṁ hi samaṁ brahma tasmād brahmaṇi te sthitāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Those pandits [wise ones] who see equally in all, those whose minds are established in equanimity – they conquer samsara even in the conditions of being a living being. They are residing in Brahman Itself, as the State of Equipoise without “dosha” [wrongness; error[s]] is verily Brahman.

### Commentary 
 --- 
When prana becomes still, the mind also becomes still. That is when “sama” [oneness] happens. When the sadhak stays in that “sama,” then that abidance is called “samadhi.” The “nirdosha” [no wrongness; error-free] state of this “sama-ness” is indeed Brahman. In the scriptures, attraction, repulsion, delusion [etc.] are called “dosha” [wrongness/error[s]]. The matters of sound, touch and such are the matters of those “doshas” as well. This is because the worldly experience itself is “dosha.” When the sadhak stills the mind and goes to take samadhi, if at that time the sadhak is not drawn by “vikarma” [that which brings one back to the worldly experience], then the sadhak's mind extinguishes in Consciousness. This extinguishing is indeed – this oneness is indeed “nirdosha” [no wrongness; error-free]. But, if at that time “vikarma” can come and attack the sadhak, then some kind of worldly matter of sound and touch and such awakens in the mind of the sadhak. At that time, the extinguishing happens while having attention on that worldly experience. Then that “samadhi” (being established in “sama”), instead of being “nirdosha,” is “sadosha” [with wrongness/error[s]]. This “sadosha” samadhi is not of Brahman. Those who are spiritual seers – their samadhi is “nirdosha.” Thus, they are established in Brahman – meaning: they have attained Brahman-ness. Even if they come down to experience the world because of the influence of prarabdha, they do not see the experiences of the world as separate from Brahman. For them, everything is verily Brahman. This is why they are “sargajit” [victorious over creation] even in the conditions of being a living being. The body of the jiva is indeed “sarga” [creation]. For as long as the jiva is alive, for that long, because of the vanity of the body being there at that time, does the jiva become overcome by the body-oriented pleasures and pains due to the contact with the worldly experience and the sense-organs. But after leaving the body at death, the jiva no longer has that vanity and does not experience the pleasures and pains. Then the jiva's attachment to the body ceases. Just like that, those who become endowed with the state of gyana, because their body-vanity has completely gone away and as they are abiding in Brahman-ness, no aberrations such as pleasure and pain arise in their minds even with the contact of the worldly experience and the sense-organs. Even in the state of being alive, they unperturbedly remain in the Bliss of Brahman. That is why they are “victorious over creation.”