### Prose 
 --- 
अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानां मैत्र: करुण एव च |
निर्ममो निरहङ्कार: समदु:खसुख: क्षमी || 13||
adveṣhṭā sarva-bhūtānāṁ maitraḥ karuṇa eva cha
nirmamo nirahankāraḥ sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ kṣhamī

सन्तुष्ट: सततं योगी यतात्मा दृढनिश्चय: |
मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्यो मद्भक्त: स मे प्रिय: || 14||
santuṣhṭaḥ satataṁ yogī yatātmā dṛiḍha-niśhchayaḥ
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The one who has no hate towards any beings or things, is friendly, compassionate, without a sense of “mine,” devoid of egotism, has the same outlook in pleasure and pain, is merciful, ever content, a yogi (sober), self-controlled, full of intelligent resolve, and has surrendered mind and intellect to Me – that devotee of Mine is indeed dear to Me. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
When the sadhak [spiritual practitioner], due to the power of sadhana, locks up the mind with its volition and non-volition, as well as the intellect with its power of ascertaining – at that time, the constricting bindings in the sadhak’s antahkarana [inner operators of personal consciousness] are loosened, and magnanimity blossoms. The feeling of resistance towards the worldly experience that was there at the time of disciplined spiritual practice – in this state, that no longer remains. Gradually, the Knowledge “everyone/everything is ‘I’” comes forth. Thus, the feelings of hate/repulsion go away. [Consequent to this Knowledge, there is the feeling] that no one is like My precious Beloved “I” [which is everyone]. Therefore, friendliness arises. The feeling “I cannot tolerate my own suffering” – that feeling spreads towards everyone, and filled with compassion, makes [everyone] one with “I”. Because everyone becomes “I”, there is no one that remains that can be called “mine.” Because there is no one present but “I”, there is no place/room for egotism to exist. No vrittis [functionalities of perception] such as pleasure and pain are at all present. Everything becomes One. Mercy is mercy. Contentment is contentment. The perception of duality that was there before – now the two merge and become one, and because of that, there is neither duality nor non-duality. Thus, this is the state of “yogi.” In this state, due to the boundless spreading out of the Self, all resolve and certainty are firmly established. The one for whom, through doing spiritual practice while having immovable faith in guru’s teaching, this state comes about – that is the one who is dear to Me. This is because that being is none other than “I”. 