### Prose 
 --- 
बुद्धिर्ज्ञानमसम्मोह: क्षमा सत्यं दम: शम: |
सुखं दु:खं भवोऽभावो भयं चाभयमेव च || 4||
buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ kṣhamā satyaṁ damaḥ śhamaḥ
sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ bhavo ’bhāvo bhayaṁ chābhayameva cha

अहिंसा समता तुष्टिस्तपो दानं यशोऽयश: |
भवन्ति भावा भूतानां मत्त एव पृथग्विधा: || 5||
ahinsā samatā tuṣhṭis tapo dānaṁ yaśho ’yaśhaḥ
bhavanti bhāvā bhūtānāṁ matta eva pṛithag-vidhāḥ

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The manifold states that arise in living beings such as “buddhi,” “jnana,” “asammoha,” “kshama,” “satya,” “dama,” “shama,” “sukha,” “duhkha,” “utpatti,” “nasha,” “bhaya,” “abhaya,” “ahimsa,” “samata,” “tushti,” “tapa,” “daan,” “yasha,” “ayasha” etc. all arise from Me. 

### Commentary 
 --- 
“Buddhi” means: the power within the antahkarana [the four-fold personal consciousness] that enables one to discern between truth and untruth [or: good and bad], and thereby allows one to understand the subtler things – meaning: the vritti [functionality] of “making certain/clear [or: making definite].”
 
Jnana – see Chapter 9, sloka 1. That which has been made clear through the enquiry-endowed “buddhi” – to apply that is called “jnana.”
 
Asammoha – “a” = negation + “saṃ” = “samyak” [total] + “moha” = the vritti [functionality] of ignorance. The state in which the vritti of ignorance ends completely – that state is called the state of “asammhoha.”
 
Kshama – the power to be indifferent to praise or derision by others, even if the recipient has the ability to respond – that is “kshama.”
 
Satya – to do good for others without any ulterior motive [of recompense and such].
 
Dama – the control of the external sense-organs.
 
Shama – the control of the antahkarana [the four inner operators of personal consciousness].
 
Sukha – “su” = “sundar” [beautiful]; “khaṃ” = void – meaning: being without anxiety/tension.
 
Duhkha – the opposite of “sukha.”
 
Bhava – birth.
 
Abhava – death.
 
Ahimsa – empathy towards living beings.
 
Samata – the ending of likes and dislikes.
 
Tushti – contentment.
 
Tapa – the effort to burn the mutations of Maya to ashes in the fire of Knowledge/Awareness.
 
Daan – the giving away of one’s properly acquired possessions, as much as is feasible, to worthy recipients. Dear sadhak! See! You are nothing but Brahman [the Absolute]. Even so – the fact that you have taken refuge in Maya, and the fact that, under the power of ego, you have dressed up as “I” and have taken on sound, touch, sight, taste and smell – these forms are your “properly acquired” “dhana” [wealth]. “Dhana” [wealth] – “dha” = “dharana” [concentration]; “na” = negation/annihilation – to be devoid of concentration is called “dhana.” [When there is focus on “dhana”] the mind cannot be concentrated [on the Self], because of being in the worldly experiences of sound and such; only restlessness is there. That is why these [worldly experiences] are called “dhana” [wealth]. All of this wealth of yours – all of these are “asat” [non-truth], because they are limited. To give away all of these to worthy recipients – meaning: to surrender them to the Limitless Parambrahman is called “daan” [giving away] (see “brahmaNAdhyaya” Chapter 5, sloka 10) – meaning: upon having cast off desires, forgetting the separate existence of those things through the practice of meditation on Brahman, and seeing Brahman in all – that is “daan.”
 
Yasha – renown from doing righteous deeds.
 
Ayaha – infamy from doing non-righteous deeds.
 
These [aforementioned things] are in the marketplace of “bhoota” [phenomena/living beings] – meaning: they exist for those who follow the dharma of the antahkarana [personal consciousness]. That is why these are called “bhoota-bhava” [the states of the “bhootas”]. Although these states arise from “I”, they are variegated – meaning: of different kinds. “That” which is the state of “I” or the State of the Self – there is no sense of separateness in that. “That” is One without a second. This is the reason that the states of the “bhootas” are completely opposite to the State of the Self.