### Prose 
 --- 
सदृशं चेष्टते स्वस्या: प्रकृतेर्ज्ञानवानपि |
प्रकृतिं यान्ति भूतानि निग्रह: किं करिष्यति || 33||
sadṛiśhaṁ cheṣhṭate svasyāḥ prakṛiter jñānavān api
prakṛitiṁ yānti bhūtāni nigrahaḥ kiṁ kariṣhyati

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
Even “gyanavan[s]” act according to their own “prakriti” [nature; phenomenal nature]. All beings go according to their “prakriti.” What will force accomplish?

### Commentary 
 --- 
“SattvarajastamasAṃ sAmyAvasthA prakṛtih” - sattva, rajah, tama – the unified state of these three gunas is called “prakriti” [nature; phenomenal nature – common noun]. When this unified state breaks, Prakriti [as the Primal Force – proper noun] becomes divided into “para” and “apara” - these two sections, and becomes active. “Apara” comprises of: earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intellect, ego – these eight  types. “Para” is: the Goddess – in the form of Life in the living beings – Who is the foundation and operator of creation. She also has been referred to as Akshara Purush [the Indestructible Being] in some places. All of these are mechanisms; they become active because of the connection with Spirit. It is upon being endowed with these that the jiva exists as “mamaivaṃshah” [My [the Lord's] eternal parts]. When this jiva becomes determined to become complete, then he/she takes up the character of being “gyanavan” [knowledgeable] and makes effort according to his/her own nature – meaning: in the way that activity-producing Prakriti continuously tries to keep the jiva in Her dominion, the “gyanavan” [spiritually directed person] tries to bring Prakriti under control in just the same way – meaning: “yato yato nishcarati      manashchanchalasthiram; tatostato niyamaitatAtmanyeva vashaṃ nayet” [whenever and wherever the restless and unsteady mind wanders, one should take it from there and at that very time and bring it to be disciplined in the Self [or: bring it back regularly to be under the control of the Self]]; the sadhak remains engaged in the Kriya of the Self according to this dictum. What happens due to that kind of effort is this: all of the “bhoota[s]” go to Prakriti – meaning: all of the sense-organs attain a state of unity and equilibrium. This happens automatically. One does not have to force it (and forcing it does not make it happen either). When the jiva becomes locked in Supreme Shiva, consciousness also draws and gathers itself into that Place; it does not stay in the body. Thus, all of the sense-organs become non-active.