### Prose 
 --- 
सर्वद्वाराणि संयम्य मनो हृदि निरुध्य च |
मूर्ध्न्याधायात्मन: प्राणमास्थितो योगधारणाम् || 12||
sarva-dvārāṇi sanyamya mano hṛidi nirudhya cha
mūrdhnyādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam āsthito yoga-dhāraṇām

ओमित्येकाक्षरं ब्रह्म व्याहरन्मामनुस्मरन् |
य: प्रयाति त्यजन्देहं स याति परमां गतिम् || 13||
oṁ ityekākṣharaṁ brahma vyāharan mām anusmaran
yaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ sa yāti paramāṁ gatim

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
The one who, has closed the doors of all of the senses, has stopped the mind in the heart, and, with yogic concentration, has established one’s prana in the head, and while continuously reciting “OM” – the single-lettered8 Brahman-mantra, and continuously remembering Me leaves the body – that being attains the Supreme Destination.

### Commentary 
 --- 
When the sadhak, having intense longing for the Divine, goes to unite the self with the Self – at that time, the sadhak has to close the nine doors [openings of the sense-organs]. When sitting in asana [meditation posture], one has to close the anus and the root of the sex organ via the two “parshnis” (heels). And, with the hand’s thumbs –  the two ears, with the two index fingers – the two eyes, with the ring fingers – the two lips, [and] with the middle fingers – the two nostrils have to be firmly held closed. It is only then that “sarvadvara samyama” [the closing of all doors] happens (the Kriya is known through the teachings of guru). In this state, the mind becomes bound to the prana that is in the heart. Therefore, [the mind,] aiming at the higher place of the intellect, rises up and sits at the middle of the two eyebrows. And the power of prana to move stops as well. Having controlled all of the doors in this way, one has to take refuge in “OM” – this single-lettered Brahman-mantra [see footnote 8 to this Chapter 8 of the Pranab Gita above] – meaning: one has to take recourse in Pranava. (“PraNava” = “pra” + Nak + vaṃ; the sound “pra” means “with active power”; the sound “Nak” means “personal self”; and the sound “vaṃ” means “void” – meaning: that thing whose active power eradicates the “I am the body” idea – that is called “Pranava.”) After that, while sitting in the asana of “chailajinakushottara” [see commentary to slokas 11-12 of Chapter 6 of the Pranab Gita], one takes this single-lettered Brahman-spoken Pranava-mantra and does “vyaharan”  [definition follows] in the path of the chitta [personal consciousness] from the Muladhar upward. The Kriya is known through the teachings of guru. “Vyaharan” – “vi” = “vishesh rupe” [in a special way] + “aharan” = “uccharayan” [definition follows immediately]. “Ut” = up above; “char” = to move about; “ayan” = movement – move it in the upward direction; lift it above. This is that which is called “lifting up the Goddess Kulakundalini.” How will one lift? Oh, but like this: “mAm anusmaraN” – by meditating on My “anu” [Particle]. How is that done? Oh, but like this: lifting that Kulakundalini slowly, via the appropriately taught Kriya, exactly through the middle of the brahmanadi from the Muladhar – (gathering up and putting away all of the lusts or desires from the “Kampur-chakra” [chakra where desires reside; Muladhar], getting to the Svadhisthan and gathering up and putting away anger, gathering up and putting away greed while going through the hollow of the eight-petaled “great path” above the Manipur, piercing the Anahata and gathering up and putting away delusion, piercing the Vishuddha and gathering up and putting away pride, piercing the Ajna and gathering up and putting away envy [the thought of “the other”]) – one has to give oblation to the Supreme Shiva at the Sahasrar. Just as this oblation is offered – the sound that happens when the three letters “A”, “U” and “M” come together, when that sound is made without any consonants whatsoever – a resonance just like that [description] will come forth (unbroken, like the flow of oil). As soon as that resonance comes forth, immediately and right along with that happening, the awareness-sense of scent, the awareness-sense of taste, the awareness-sense of sight, the awareness-sense of touch and the awareness-sense of sound will all end, and an incredibly beautiful Sound will come forth. Right in the middle of that Sound there will be an unimaginable Light. Within that Light, one will renounce the world-intoxicated mind and all hesitation and conflict, and being devoid of pervading and non-pervading in the Expanse of the State of Vishnu, one will attain dissolution/merging. When one leaves the body (dies) in this way, one attains the Supreme Destination. This teaching – one who has put his/her head down at the Feet of Sri Sri Sadguru – only that person has known. This goes without saying.