### Prose 
 --- 
यत्करोषि यदश्नासि यज्जुहोषि ददासि यत् |
यत्तपस्यसि कौन्तेय तत्कुरुष्व मदर्पणम् || 27||
yat karoṣhi yad aśhnāsi yaj juhoṣhi dadāsi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruṣhva mad-arpaṇam

शुभाशुभफलैरेवं मोक्ष्यसे कर्मबन्धनै: |
संन्यासयोगयुक्तात्मा विमुक्तो मामुपैष्यसि || 28||
śhubhāśhubha-phalair evaṁ mokṣhyase karma-bandhanaiḥ
sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā vimukto mām upaiṣhyasi

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Kaunteya [son of Kunti; Arjuna]! Whatever it is that you may do – whether you provide “bhojan” [feast], do “havan” [oblations],  do “daan” [give charitably], or do “tapasya” [austerities] – offer that act to Me. If you do so, then you will be freed from karmic bondage, the bringer of good and bad outcomes. If you become freed and renounce yourself into having a mind that is united [with the Self], you will attain Me.

### Commentary 
 --- 
Dear sadhak! When you stay with the lust for the enjoyments of the worldly experience – at that time, your “motherliness” shows up due to attachment for the worldly experiences. And not being able to let go of that attachment – that is what is called “miserliness” [hoarding the worldly experiences]. And then when you push away this miserliness and, through proper application of the teachings, take earth and put it into water, water into fire, fire into air, air into space, and space into superspace  – this is called “karan” [performing the act]. This is that which is called “fatherliness.” And all of this that you are going on doing [now] – this is called “bhoga” [feasting]. (To enjoy the worldly experience is called “bhoga” [feasting]. In this, smelling, licking etc. – everything is there.) And that you are taking this [“bhoga”] and throwing it into “I” – this is “havan” [offering into spiritual fire]. This enjoyment of the worldly experiences and such that you threw in – that is “daan” [giving away]. And that you burned to ashes the mutations of Maya into the Fire of Brahman – meaning: the Fire of Awareness – this is that which is called “tapasya” [fire-practice]. One has to take all of these and fall into “I”. This falling in “I” is called “madarpana” [offering to Me]. Good and bad fruits of actions cannot touch this kind of offering. Therefore, one becomes free of karmic bondage. “SaṃnyAsa” – “saṃ” = “samyak” [completely] + “nyAsa” = to throw away; cast off – as soon as everything is cast off, right then, your “I” fell into the “Pure ‘I’”; union happened. Two “I”s becoming One – that is the state of being “yukta” [united]. There is no more body – meaning: there is no awareness of body. “Vimukti” – meaning: a particular freedom (avoidance [of samsara]) is attained. This is your state of becoming “I”.