### Prose 
 --- 
न मे पार्थास्ति कर्तव्यं त्रिषु लोकेषु किञ्चन |
नानवाप्तमवाप्तव्यं वर्त एव च कर्मणि || 22||
na me pārthāsti kartavyaṁ triṣhu lokeṣhu kiñchana
nānavāptam avāptavyaṁ varta eva cha karmaṇi

### Bengali Translation 
 --- 
O Partha [Arjuna]! In the three worlds I have nothing that is “kartavya” [that I must do]. There is nothing I should get nor anything I should not get. I am just in the action here; that is all.

### Commentary 
 --- 
 “Bhuh,” “Bhuvah,” “Svah” [physical, subtle, causal – respectively] - these three words represent the whole universe. This Prakritic creation is actually from One Self; thus all of this is filled with the Self – One. For this reason, there is no “kartavya” [obligatory act], nothing to be attained or nothing not to attain. That action, by not doingwhich one causes harm to oneself – what to say, [by not doing which] one cannot even [physically] exist – that is “kartavya” [must do; obligatory act]. For example: if one does not give oblations [food] to “vaishvanara” [fire in the navel area] (in the stomach) every day, there can be no life; therefore that is an obligatory act for the human being. There are many such kinds of Prakritic [worldly] and “adhyatmic” [spiritual] obligatory acts, without doing which, one simply cannot exist. In regards to the Paramatman [Supreme Self], no such kinds of obligatory actions exist. It is not even possible for them to exist [in the case of the Supreme Self]. This is because: the universe that is “Atmavinirgataṃ” [existing within the Self], which exists only because the Self exists, whose existence does not make the Self be existent – how can there be obligatory actions for the Self in this kind of universe? The jiva's recourse/support is food; food's recourse/support is not the jiva. If one examines the aspect of recourse/support and the one who takes recourse/support, it can be seen that the recourse of the body is prana; the recourse of the prana is the mind; the recourse of the mind is jivatman [individual self]; and the recourse of the jivatma is Paramatman [Supreme Self] – it is He Who is the Supreme Person – Brahman-Consciousness/Spirit – “I”. This “I” that is the Supreme Self, the One Who is the recourse/home of all, for Whom no thing is a recourse – that “I” has no “kartavya” [obligatory acts]. And because there is no existence of things separate from the Supreme, there is nothing that is “aprapta” [something not to be had], nor there is any separate “praptavya” [something to be had] in the worldly things; there is no division of time such as past and future, etc. That Being is present only as an actor. In the flow of karma [actions], the jiva has the divisions of time such as past, future etc. The Supreme Self does not have this. This is because the jiva knows little, and therefore sees only the divisions of time. Because the Self is Omniscient and Omnipresent, it is in the present in every place and every way. — Begin Footnote. — It can be illustrated somewhat through this explanation. Like this: land, water, air, clouds – inside and outside all of these there is space. It is within this space that water is present in circuitous flows and in different forms. For example: the water from oceans, rivers and from other bodies of water goes underground, and wetting the nether areas of the Earth, comes up again in the form of springs/fountains. And again, becoming vapor and taking recourse in the sphere of air, the water takes the form of clouds up above, and then descends in the form of rain and returns to the land, oceans, rivers and such. This endless flow is going on and on, unceasingly. If one observes a drop of water, it can be seen that it is not still, but restless. When the drop of water comes from the river and become “present” in the ocean, then it is “past” in the river. When it leaves the ocean upon becoming vapor and becomes “present” in the air, then it has no existence in the ocean. It becomes “past” [in the ocean]. Finally, when it falls as rain and is “present” on land, then it is “past” in the sphere of air. Its [the droplet's] endless and unavoidable flow of rising and falling has the future ahead of it and the past behind it. When it is in the ocean, it is “past” for the land, rivers, mountains and such, and it is “future” for the way of air. But the drop of water is always “present” in space [because space is within all of the aforementioned states]. Just as the drop of water has no division of time when it is in endless space [because it is always there in space], and it has nothing to not attain nor anything to attain – in the same way, for the Supreme Self, there is no “kartavya” [something which must be done] or divisions of time. — End Footnote. — Upon arriving at the state of equipoise in samadhi and becoming transformed into the Pure “I” above the sheath of the universe, the sadhak sees that in the sheath of the universe, the obligatory actions, the things to be attained, the things not to be attained – all of these things after which he/she had been running because of the perception of lack – are nothing but delusion. It is because the sadhak is present in the actions as the Witness that all of the actions of the universe are being carried out. The sadhak is actually not doing anything at all. The sadhak was only tied up in the possession of one's own doership because of being in love with Maya due to being under the power of ignorance.