### Prose 
 --- 
आपूर्यमाणमचलप्रतिष्ठं
समुद्रमाप: प्रविशन्ति यद्वत् |
तद्वत्कामा यं प्रविशन्ति सर्वे
स शान्तिमाप्नोति न कामकामी || 70||
āpūryamāṇam achala-pratiṣhṭhaṁ
samudram āpaḥ praviśhanti yadvat
tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśhanti sarve
sa śhāntim āpnoti na kāma-kāmī

### Transliteration 
 --- 
apuryamanamachalapratishtham samudramapah pravishanti yadvat tadvat kama yam pravishanti sarve sa shantimapnoti na kamakami - 70-

### Translation 
 --- 
In the calm and immensely complete ocean All waters enter there in undisturbed ways Those whose sense matters are as this These unattached ones attain liberation But one whose mind is anxious in enjoyment of the world Does not receive the Supreme Kaivalya, know that - 70-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: Just as the sea, already full of water, remains calm regardless of rivers and streams entering it, in the same way, those who, even being filled with the Bliss of Brahman, can partake in sense matters in an unperturbed and desireless manner, meaning as if done by an unseen doer - they are the ones who live liberated from the imprisonment of this material world. In previous slokas, it was stated that because of the emergence of anger from desire, the jiva becomes as if dead, enveloped in the stupor of ignorance.  Therefore, one should cut the root of this desire.  Then it was stated in this sloka [70] that partaking without desire will liberate one from this material enchainment.  There is a possibility of misunderstanding these statements.  Therefore, it is appropriate to explain what type of thing this desire is. The matters of the three gunas of Prakriti - the cause of creation - were spoken about in the twelfth sloka of this chapter.  The sadhakas using the operative power of rajoguna, experience these in five forms, and scriptural scholars have called each of the residing places of the five subtle elements, meaning substance (cause) - earth-element, water-element, fire-element, air-element and ether-element, and they have also said that all three gunas - sattva (neuter), raja (positive) and tama (negative) - are magnetized to those subtle elements present in Nature. It is written in the Vedanta shastras that all organs of perception (sensory organs) in the Universe were created from the experiential part (sentient part) of those great elements’ aspect of sattva guna, and the five types of sattva guna respective to the elements from those organs of perception brought about the all-experiencing, meaning all-knowing (omniscient), mind.  And the operative aspect - the rajoguna aspect - of all of those great elements created the organs of action (motor organs), and the conglomeration of the rajoguna aspects of those five elements from all of the organs of action brought about the creation of the all-powerful (almighty) prana (magnetism or vital fluid).  And the inert tamoguna aspect of those great elements, mixing with together created the scenery of this Universe in its physical form. If Prakriti were not filled with these three gunas, then none of these substances would manifest.  Because Prakriti is the root cause of this creation, It is called the causal body of Brahmanda [Universe in all levels].  From the great elements, sattva and raja guna-manifested prana and other subtle substances comprise what is called the subtle body; and the tamoguna-manifested visible, material and form-oriented scenery of planets and satellites and the entire physical world comprise what is called the material body.  It is the subtle body that is operating the entirety of atoms and sub-atoms etc. necessary for the creation, preservation and destruction of all planets, satellites and solar worlds. All of manifested creation is a part of this immense Brahmanda.  Therefore, all three bodies, material, subtle and causal, are present in everything, some parts evident and some parts hidden.  With the erosion of impurities, all of these bodies, and eventually five levels, are revealed.  Because of this the Vedanta scholars have called this Universe “panchakoshamaya” [with five covers].  Fearing excessiveness, I am unable to elucidate about these in detail here.  But it is important to say this much:  that the human body is also a part of this Immense Brahmanda and all - mind, prana, senses and everything else - are present here in their highest forms. Because this all-pervading mind was born of the all-revealing and all-experiencing aggregate of the sattvic elements, it is omniscient.  When there is a lack perceived in the organs of perception, this completely immersed in sattva guna (neutralized) mind becomes desirous and slightly diverted which gives rise to sattva and rajoguna (polarized).  The way that, if in the midst of innumerable magnetic compasses, one magnet of sattva guna (neutralized magnet) becomes somehow influenced by raja or tamoguna (polarized), all of those innumerable magnetic compasses will in the sympathizing process become attracted to that and cause a corrupted condition, in the same way, when the sattva guna-filled mind becomes desirous, sensing lack in some sense, and gets slightly corrupted, it becomes attached to raja and tamoguna (polarized).  And by this, as the pranas become gradually attracted, this entire world and universe is under the force of prana.  This prana, being created from the operative quality of the collective rajoguna, is all-powerful.  Therefore, all things present in the Brahmanda are under its control.  Endowed with the above-mentioned force, this all-powerful prana, by the organs of action (motor fluid or organs of motion) makes possible the enjoyment of those corrupted things desired by the mind through the organs of perception (sensory fluid or organs of sense) and by thus satisfying the mind, returns it to its natural state. The organs of perception in this Immense Brahmanda (motor electricity) is experiencing everything by themselves and because no substance exists without them, they have no need for the enjoyment of anything.  Thus, the senses being satisfied in every way (in full satisfaction), the mind, which is born of them, resides in a still, undisturbed and unaffected state.  In this way, with the mind ever-remaining in its natural condition, prana does not get agitated and therefore, the organs of action dependent upon it remain ever-dormant.  Thus unhindered in any way, the prana of this Immense Brahmanda (universal magnetism vitality), in its all-powerful form (with almighty power), operates, like Its blood and guts, this Infinite Universe with its planets and satellites according to the course of natural law.  The Overlord Consciousness of this Immense Brahmanda is called by the scriptural scholars as Paramatman or Parampurush.  Being in the state of non-doing and tranquility, He is ruling over the world and Brahmanda by prana in the awakened condition.  The individualized parts of Him are called Jivatman or Purush. In the course of natural law, the jiva matures from knowing only its annamaya kosha [food covering] to the realization of the pranamaya kosha [prana covering], and, further within that, when it is able to realize the manomaya kosha [mind covering], impurity is gradually diminished and the jiva acquires many types of sub-human bodies, going progressively higher until the jnanamaya kosha [knowledge covering] is prevalent, which is when the jiva takes a human form.  When the jiva completes the fulfillment of body and mind with its senses through the miraculous power of yoga, having experienced all mind, prana, senses etc. of this Immense Brahmanda as its own body, the jiva realizes the anandamaya kosha [bliss covering].  In this way, one attains Parampurush or Paramatman. Having attained this wholeness, if at some moment it cannot experience the Universe, desires for enjoyment arise in the jiva’s mind, one after another.  Once the jiva’s mind moves from its natural state even a little, prana becomes attracted to that and calls forth the force of the all-powerful prana-airs - prana vayu - of this Brahmanda.  Thus, that corrupted substance which should be avoided appears in order to satisfy the craving of the jiva.  By partaking in those objects of desire, the jiva pacifies the mind or returns it to its natural state.  The mind being natural and peaceful, the jiva’s prana-vayu (vitality or animal magnetism) becomes completely without force, and having its full strength, meaning being its awakened state, continues to operate all things in their normal ways.  When one can keep his own prana in its awakened state, at the emergence of any desire in the mind, the object of that desire immediately appears in order to appease the jiva.  This omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent mind is so great that no thing and no power in this Universe can tolerate its unhappiness.  This Infinite Universe is waiting with extreme eagerness to satisfy the mind.  No matter what is necessary to fulfill the mind’s desires, even if the thing does not exist in the Brahmanda - it is immediately created to quell the mind’s craving.  In this way, this solar system/universe in the Infinite Universe is a servant of the jiva’s will power, and is existing to fulfill its desires and bring it peace. But, being small-minded and restless, one desire is immediately followed by another in the jiva’s mind and it is always perturbed and distorted.  Because of this, the prana-vayu’s force is working with many different objects and, not being able to apply its power into anything in a focused way, a very fragmented and scattered state manifests.  The prana-vayu cannot properly work with the prana of the Brahmanda in this corrupted condition, and because the force is being used for all kinds of conflicting thoughts, nothing is able to manifest.  And by this the body begins to not function properly and eventually becomes useless.  When the present body is destroyed, because the force of those numerous types of desires were not renounced, the jiva has to take another body appropriate to the aggregate power of those forces (resultant force).  Therefore, because of all of the accumulated desires, the jiva has to again take birth and be bound to this worldly life.  Thus, without their fulfillment, the jiva has no way out.  About this subject, it is written in Tantra that the good and bad karma of human beings, meaning the matters of desire, must be fulfilled.  There is no diminishing of this without fulfillment.  Until all of the these good and bad karmas are completely eliminated, the jiva has no possibility of peace or liberation. ma bhukta kshiyate karma kalpakoti shatairapi avashyameva bhoktavyam kritam karma shubhashubam yavanna kshiyate karma shubhanchashubhameva va tayanna jayate moksham nrinam kalpashatairapi All of these accumulated desires are what the scriptural scholars call “adrishta” [unseen fate]. For this reason, in order to renounce the desires of adrishta, it has been stated in the previous slokas that one should be detached from its roots of affection and dislike.  And in this sloka, because there is no other way than to fulfill the accumulated desires of adrishta, it has been taught that one should in an unaffected way, meaning without creating any new adrishta, return the mind to its natural state and make it tranquil by the fulfillment of the previously accumulated adrishta. When by yogakriya the foundation of desire - like and dislike - is extinguished, the revelation of Divinity fulfills all matters of desire, upon which the mind returns to its natural state and becomes tranquil.  And experiencing all mind, prana and senses of this Immense Brahmanda as one’s own body and pervading throughout the Universe, the jiva becomes the Total Consciousness of the Universe - Parampurush or Paramatman.  Thus, there being nothing else existing in the Universe other than the Self, the scriptural saints have called this attainment “Kaivalyapada.” - 70-