### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
इमं विवस्वते योगं प्रोक्तवानहमव्ययम् |
विवस्वान्मनवे प्राह मनुरिक्ष्वाकवेऽब्रवीत् || 1||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
imaṁ vivasvate yogaṁ proktavān aham avyayam
vivasvān manave prāha manur ikṣhvākave ’bravīt

एवं परम्पराप्राप्तमिमं राजर्षयो विदु: |
स कालेनेह महता योगो नष्ट: परन्तप || 2||
evaṁ paramparā-prāptam imaṁ rājarṣhayo viduḥ
sa kāleneha mahatā yogo naṣhṭaḥ parantapa

### Transliteration 
 --- 
Sri Bhagavan said: imam vivasvate yogam proktavanahamavyayam vivasvan manave praha manurikshvakavehabravit - 1- evam paramparapraptamimam rajarshayo viduh sa kaleneha mahata yogo nashtah paramtapa - 2-

### Translation 
 --- 
The Lord again spoke to Arjuna I taught this Eternal Knowledge to the Sun-god The lord of the day taught it to the god of obsequies, Manu Manu taught it to Ikshvaku - 1- Through lineage sages attained perfection through this yoga’s method That lineage-bestowed yoga disappeared - 2-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: By scientific research in both this country and the West, it has been thoroughly proven that the sun is an incredibly powerful sphere of electrical conduction (powerful electric conductor).  From its electricity, the creation, sustenance and dissolution work of this world is being accomplished.  The light that is radiating all around it is only pure, condensed electricity.  The saintly scriptural scholars have analyzed the subtle body’s source as “suksham bhuta,” “mahabhuta” or “tanmatra.”  And that, by focusing steadily, the blue sphere that can be seen in the middle of the sun is from where that “mahabhuta” (electricity) emerges and dissolves.  This place is hidden from all of the senses, and as such, it is empty and dark, which is why it appears as a blue form.  All of the sukhsham bhutas [electricity] arise from that and accomplish the works of creation, preservation and dissolution.  The scriptural scholars have said that blue form in the sun is the cause of this world-Brahmanda and thus called it the three-guna-endowed Prakriti [Trigunamayi Prakriti].  All of these sukhsham bhutas (electricity) emerge from that and manifest themselves as many conditions of existence, the mixing of which creates the appearance of this physical world, and flooding the world internally, pervading everything, they are perpetually eroding and doing the work of destruction.  Because all of these mahabhutas (electricity) are coagulated, meaning condensed, around the sun, they are visible to the senses, but because they are in a rarefied state in other things of the world, one cannot even perceive their existence.  The saintly scriptural scholars have called this aggregate of different kinds of suksham bhutas pervading the inner workings of everything and operating the creation, preservation and dissolution of all as the “subtle body” of the world.  The mixing of these suksham bhutas (by five elemental ways) give rise to this visible world of material substances which the scholars have called the “physical [or material] body.”  A sun and its planets and satellites can be called a “solar system” or Brahmanda.  All of the stars that we see in sky are other suns, most of which are many times larger than our sun.  They also have planets and satellites orbiting them; each of them is also a solar system or Brahmanda.  There are infinite numbers of Brahmandas in this Universe, and throughout the every Brahmanda are the three bodies - physical, subtle and causal - present, which comprise the Universe.  All matter in the world is a part of this Brahmanda; therefore, the three bodies - physical, subtle and causal - are present in everything, partly visible and partly invisible.  With the diminution of impurity, these bodies gradually reveal themselves.  This subject has been explained extensively in sloka 70 of the second chapter.  After traveling through eight million four hundred thousand yonis, the jiva is purified and attains the highest physical form in this Brahmanda as a human being, in which all of these bodies are fully revealed.  Because the above-mentioned three bodies, sun, moon, stars etc. - everything in the Brahmanda as mentioned are present in this body, the saintly scriptural scholars call this the “miniature Brahmanda.”  By the Sadguru-graced Kriya, when the mind is stilled, one experiences the above-mentioned sun, moon etc., all in full form in the body.  This cannot be acquired by indirect knowledge; it can only be known by one’s direct experience.  Without the sacrament of the Holy Feet of Sadguru, this direct knowledge cannot be experienced. From the sacrament of Sadguru, one can also become aware that among the nadis present in this body, there are three which are primary - ida, pingala and sushumna.  Ida is on the left side, pingala is on the right and the sushumna is in the middle of the body.  Ida is like a door of meditation.  By it, the mind can rid itself of unhappiness and become cheerful.  For this reason, the saintly scriptural scholars call the presiding god in it, “Chandra [moon]” (chad - the substance of delight).  By the Guru-instructed Kriya, sadhakas experience this moon as a comely, snowy sphere in front of them.  Pingala is like a door of knowledge.  When the mind is stilled by this, knowledge is revealed.  For this reason, the scriptural saints call its presiding god, “Surya [sun]” (sri - substance of motion and knowledge).  The sadhakas by Guru-instructed Kriya experience this in the as a fiery sun in the back.  By singing, “The right-side air; in the back country beneficence, etc.,” in his world-renown song, the great sadhaka Ramprasad gave a hint of the method of the practice to call forth the presiding god of the impurity eroding, knowledge-revealing pingala.  Meditation, knowledge, renunciation and tranquility are the first, second, third and fourth levels, respectively, of gradual progress on the path of sadhana.  When the mind eventually becomes happy through meditation, knowledge becomes necessary for its steadfastness.  In this way, as the mind attains happiness and steadiness by meditation and knowledge, it is then understood that - all of the things about which I was so concerned saying, “Mine, mine” - none of it, not even the body is owned by the jiva..  Thus, as a jiva I own nothing in this world-Brahmanda, or, All is Mine as this World-Pervading Consciousness.  If I were not here, then none of all this could be here.  This world and Brahmanda are existing in Me.  The king-sage Janaka expressed this, after having received Knowledge-initiation from his gurudev, Maharshi Ashtavakra.  As in - yatha prakashayamyekam dehamenam tatha jagat ato mama jagat sarvamathava cha na kinchana -   Ashtavakra Samhita 2:2. When knowledge is established, all desires are renounced at once, and in this way, when meditation, knowledge and renunciation are established, the mind moves into the sushumna and procures tranquility.  This sushumna is a place filled with peace.  When the mind is pacified by it, the Eternal Consciousness Itself is revealed.  For this reason, the saintly scriptural scholars call the Lord of All, world-ruling, Triguna-owning Consciousness as the presiding God of the sushumna.  It is from these three nadis that the sixty thousand nadis have arisen and are actively present throughout the body.  Maharshi Vedavyas wrote about these three in the Mahabharata as the moon-family, the sun-family and the “vrishni”-family (vrish-ni:  “vrish” - being the lord; ruling) as primary families. When one becomes aware of all this by acquiring Sadguru’s teaching, one can explain these two slokas as such:  when by the previously mentioned way the evasive desire is eradicated and the Supreme Self-Substance is realized, gradually the causal body in the form of the sun appears between the eyebrows in this miniature Brahmanda-body, the place of manifestation.  And by that, it can be clearly known that this causal body, or the sun, is united with Consciousness by the union with the Kutasthachaitanya.  And from this sun, the electricity radiating from all around it having attained Consciousness is existing as Manu, the source of the human body.  And it is from this, having attained Consciousness, the ajna chakra is existing as the primary door to the wisdom of nivritti.  And from this the chakras such as Muladhar etc. are residing in the significant parts of the body, prevailing in Consciousness-union.  Finally, this Consciousness is spread out all throughout the sixty thousand nadis in such a way that even Its existence cannot be readily known. - 1 and 2-