### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
अक्षरं ब्रह्म परमं स्वभावोऽध्यात्ममुच्यते |
भूतभावोद्भवकरो विसर्ग: कर्मसञ्ज्ञित: || 3||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
akṣharaṁ brahma paramaṁ svabhāvo ’dhyātmam uchyate
bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo visargaḥ karma-sanjñitaḥ

अधिभूतं क्षरो भाव: पुरुषश्चाधिदैवतम् |
अधियज्ञोऽहमेवात्र देहे देहभृतां वर || 4||
adhibhūtaṁ kṣharo bhāvaḥ puruṣhaśh chādhidaivatam
adhiyajño ’ham evātra dehe deha-bhṛitāṁ vara

### Transliteration 
 --- 
aksharam param brahma svabhabohdhyatmamuchyate bhutabhavodbhavakarovisargah karmasamjnitah - 3- adhibhutam ksharobhavah purushashchadhidaivatam adhiyajnohhamevatra dehe dehabhritam varah - 4-

### Translation 
 --- 
Hearing this, the Lord spoke Gradually I will tell you Partha, listen attentively The Immutable, Param Brahman, who cannot be destroyed The sustainer of the Cosmos, all-pervading, revealed Self All bodies are Its part, the same as fire It is known as Spirit The different ways God presides in creatures That is known as “adhibhut” -3- The ruler of all gods in the sun world The one who is there is known as “adhidaiva” In all bodies within, fruits come by yajna Thus I am the One that is called “adhiyajna” - 4-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: The types of realizations that come to be, if one’s mind remains focused in Kutasthachaitanya when these types of questions arise in the energy of fire element, is what is being presented in these slokas. To understand this, it is necessary to explain what is “Pranava”; that is being elucidated below. OM - this sound is called “Pranava.” “A” + “U “+ “M” - the union of these three sounds comprise this word. “A” means Brahma,* “U” means Vishnu, “M” means Maheshvara. “A” + “U” = “O” and the “chandrabindu” (a phonetic symbol drawn as a crescent with a dot above it - see the OM symbol) takes the place of “M” to represent the nasal sound; as when - “bangsha” [bamboo] becomes “ba(n)sh,” “hangsa” [swan] becomes “ha(n)s” etc.** [The “OM” sound is not written in Sanskritic languages with an “M”, but the above-mentioned “chandrabindu” - as it is in the Bengali text in this Gita as well - and is often pronounced as “ONG”, where the “G” is never completed.] Thus, the union of Vishnu, Brahma and Maheshvara is the meaning of this OM sound. Now, what this aggregate of Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshvar is, and what the condition is when they are one - that needs to somewhat be expounded upon. [*In the sections marked “Poetically” and “Commentary” in this translation, “Brahma” always means the Creator aspect of the Trinity [Creator, Sustainer, Destroyer], and “Brahman” always means the Supreme Absolute, which is beyond all and is the Source of the Trinity. In many translations, the transliteration “Brahma” is used to represent both the Absolute as well as the Creator aspect, the two being distinguished from each other by phonetic marks representing a short “a” in the end of the word for the Absolute, and a long “a” at the end of the word for the Creator aspect. Not using phonetic markings in the English parts of this translation, the traditional unmarked transliterations for those two words have been used, as explained above in this footnote. The Sanskrit slokas, however, have been transliterated without consideration of such distinctions. **The “n”s in parentheses are not pronounced as consonants. They indicate a slightly overt nasal sound.] In the first sloka of the first chapter of this book it has been explained that in this creation, Consciousness (Spirit) is referred to by these eight names: Vishva, Birat, Taijas, Hiranyagarbha, Prajna, Ishvar, Chidabhas and Kutasthachaitanya. In them, the first six mentioned are presiding in the functions of action, and the last two mentioned are existing as two types of revelatory aspects. Among the first six states of Consciousness, Vishva and Birat - meaning the tamas-dominated ones - are existing as the physical form of Consciousness, which, because of their nature to transform/destroy, are constantly changing. The one who has been referred to as the Lord of Destruction/Transformation, or Maheshvar, in the commentary to the eighth sloka of the fourth chapter - that destruction aspect of Consciousness is called “adhibhut.” Taijas and Hiranyagarbha - meaning the rajas-dominated oness - are the subtle aspects of Consciousness presiding within all physical elements. That which has been called the Lord of Creation, or Brahma - that is who is the being within the abode of physical creation, and is called the creation-causing, demi-god-energy endowed “adhidaiva.” And Prajna and Ishvar - meaning the sattva-dominated - are the aspects of Consciousness presiding in causal form - the one who has been referred Vishnu, the sustainer/holder of the world. Being self-revealed, he is the one who is called “adhyatma.” By the practice of Sadguru-instructed Kriya and by the study of the matters of Self, with mind completely focused, sadhakas gradually come to know their own physical bodies to be the aggregate of the Cosmos, or Birat - meaning the “adhibhut” Mahaeshvar; having done so, they experience the form of the subtle body within that [the physical body] - Taijas’s sum total form of Hiranyagarbha - meaning Brahma, that “adhidaiva” by whom all physical aspects of creation are appearing; after which, sadhakas experience its [the physical and subtle aspects’] sustainer/holder - the causal body’s sum total, known as Ishvar-consciousness. That Ishvar-consciousness is manifesting all aspects of both the physical and subtle aspects of creation. In this state, sadhakas experience the aforementioned “Pranava” with complete clarity. For this reason, this [Pranava] is call “Ishvar-vachak” [the Word pertaining to Ishvar]. For the sake of explanation, this is what the saintly scriptural scholars have described as the simultaneously arising OM Pranava sound as the united condition of the aforementioned Brahma-, Vishnu- and Maheshvar-knowing three letters of A, U, M. The highest purpose of Pranava, because mind comes near to the Lord by its experience, is “Ishvarpranidhan” [meditating on Ishvar]. By it, the subconscious becomes exposed, all obstacles are destroyed, and mind easily becomes absorbed in the Divine. For this reason, it is this subconscious-exposing Omkar Sound, or Pranava, that they call the Religion of the Self [“atmadharma”]. This state is the highest. If one can abide in this state, then nothing remains unknown in creation - physical, subtle, etc., and even when Brahma and all the others are destroyed in the time of dissolution, this state never ends. As in Patanjal - ishvara pranidhanadva - no. 23 tasya vachakah pranavah - no. 23 tajjapastadarthabhavanam - no. 28 tatah pratyakchetanadhigamohpantarayabhavashcha - no. 29 tatraniratishayam sarvajnabijam - no. 25 sa esha purveshamapi guruh kalenanavacchedat - no. 26 ity samadhipadah Thus, this creation is existing due to the conglomeration of adhibhut, adhidaiva and adhyatma, and only by the Atman-Kriya Pranava is the Essence of Consciousness manifest in the elements. But none of the above-mentioned in creation is self-manifesting; therefore, even Pranava is not self-revealing, and neither is the Essence of Consciousness manifesting in all elements by it. Chidabhas and Kutasthachaitanya are present in creation to reveal all of them; this has already been previously explained. In that, the Abhaschaitanya [Chidabhas] is only the reflection of Kutasthachaitanya; this has been explained in the first sloka of the first chapter. Therefore, only Kutasthachaitanya is the revealer of all creation, and thereby also the revealer of the Atman-Kriya Pranava. By the Sadguru-graced techniques, taking recourse in Kutasthachaitanya Itself, gradually becoming purified, and realizing Pranava, sadhakas experience the entire adhibhautik [physical essence], adhidaivik [subtle essence] and adhyatmik [causal essence] comprised creation. It is this Kutasthachaitanya that is every yajna, meaning the Lord of the Consciousness-revealing Kriya; it is by taking recourse in This and by This, being engaged in Kriya, that sadhakas experience the whole of creation as revealed within themselves. It this Kutasthachaitanya that is present as the Supreme in all creation, and therefore also in the bodies of the embodied. That Boundless, Infinite Consciousness Who is Above All, and is gracefully abiding as Immutable and Eternal - That is what is known as Brahman. -3 and 4-