### Prose 
 --- 
यदि मामप्रतीकारमशस्त्रं शस्त्रपाणय: |
धार्तराष्ट्रा रणे हन्युस्तन्मे क्षेमतरं भवेत् || 46||
yadi mām apratīkāram aśhastraṁ śhastra-pāṇayaḥ
dhārtarāṣhṭrā raṇe hanyus tan me kṣhemataraṁ bhavet

### Transliteration 
 --- 
Sanjay said: evamuktarjunah samkhye rathopastha upavishat visrijya sasharam chapam shokasavingnamanasah - 46-

### Translation 
 --- 
Lifeless, weaponless, in this way am I Even if the armed Kauravas kill me With that I will be supremely blessed Because in that no sin occurs - 45- Described Sanjay to Dhritarashtra Thus did Arjun speak in the battlefield Took his seat in the chariot In despondent sorrowful heart, abandoning bow and arrow - 46-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: Bearing arms, meaning the skillful and powerful clans of the mind and ego with their faculties - if they can destroy this fire element in this state while it has turned away and is Kriya-less, it would be a good thing inndeed.  Thinking in this way, the fire element renounced his power and sat downheartedly and impotently in the body. - 45 and 46- ity srimadbhagavadgitayam padabodhineevrittou prathamohadhyah [End of first chapter] SUMMARIZED DESCRIPTION: The usual practice is that things that are necessary to know in the beginning without which a book may be difficult to understand are often stated in the “introduction” section in the book.  But this practice is not common in Sanskrit scriptures.  The Sanskrit scholars presented those matters in the first chapter.  Following this custom, the first chapter of the Srimad Bhagavad Gita is an introduction only.  The kind of state in which it becomes necessary to read this Gita is what is written in this first chapter. When Kutasthachaitanya is established through the practice of Sadguru-instructed Kriya, one no longer wishes to partake in societal functions which are full of disease, uncertainty, confusion, indolence, illusion, the ceaseless nature of it all, and throwing away all of these, he has no more desire to take part in winter, summer, sorrow etc. and the innumerable conflicts and endless suffering because of them.  Wanting to leave these things behind, one desires to immerse oneself to attain the Endless Universe of that Infinite, All-Powerful, Infinite Knowledge and Eternally Blissful Brahman. For this reason, to become aware of the faculties of pravritti and nivritti in the body, the sadhakas use mental divine sight, meaning the eye of wisdom and see that the five elements on the nivritti side, having been educated by the world-guru samskara, are revealed by the disturbance-vanquishing Tranquil Light to be presiding in the six chakras, and are beckoning with their mighty and powerful comrades: reverence, creative energy, memory, absorption, wisdom, quickening, yama, niyama, asana, pranayam, pratyahara, dharana, samadhi, samyama and the Kundalini Shakti awakened by the power of the five elements giving rise to the five points etc.  On the pravritti side, the clans of mind and ego along with their faculties - ignorance, conceit, passion, hatred, attachment, karma, samskara, desires and other such primary ones are positioned to stand in the way of liberation, ready to use many kinds of methods and tricks.  Even so, the pravritti side is well aware of their inferiority in power in comparison to the abilities of the nivritti side, and thereby carefully placing themselves in their own stations of strength in the senses, along with self-consciousness and ego are making the body ring with their own sounds.  At this, on the nivritti side, from the Muladhar the earth element’s mad buzzing of bees, from the Svadhisthana the water element’s flute, from the Manipura the fire element’s vina, from the Anahata the air element’s long-sustaining bell, from the Vishuddha the ether element’s thunder, and from the Kutasthachaitanya the five Pranava sounds - all unite and an unspeakably beautiful sound arises, along with different sounds from different nadis, and by this, mind, iintellect, small consciousness, ego and their cohort faculties are being decimated.  When this experience happens, for the vanquishing of the pravritti side, by the power of the fire element Mahadeva appears in the middle of the eyebrows and upon ascending the spinal column and ready to apply Kriya, a desire comes up to observe the ones on the opposing side.  Thus, revealed by the Kutasthachaitanya, one sees that the opposing side is Chidabhas, samskara, karma, desire, vanity etc. who have been lifelong companions; seeing which the fire element becomes heart-broken, the mouth becomes dry, chills run through the body, and sweating and trembling, the spinal column wilts and the mind becomes restless and impatient.  Even if one dies by the hands of these lifelong companions who have given one sensory pleasures, one cannot destroy or abandon them.  They are the foes of this Kriya.  What of rulership of this small body, even for rulership of this Universe in the midst of Infinity we do not think it right to destroy or renounce this worldly happiness.  If they are destroyed, what is the need of our rulership at all, and what is the need of life even?  We cannot possibly become happy in any way by this and there is significant danger in that as well.  Destroying the always prevalent sensory experience or renouncing it can bring about delusions by the corrupted imagination of the powers of sight, touch and other sensual faculties and that will result in deprivation of food for the five elements, mind, intellect etc., which will bring about their ruin.  Although these virtues of race and religion are not a concern of the murderous side of the ego, having experienced all this via the five elements, how can we proceed with this kind of work?  Alas, alas!  What a terribly unholy work we were prepared to do!  “Let these five elements be destroyed.”   Thinking thus, in this despondent state of the fire element, the sadhakas settle themselves, renouncing Kriya. Thus ends the first chapter of the yogashastra upanishad Srimad Bhagavad Gita with analysis via various scriptures of this country and the West, along with spiritual commentary.