### Prose 
 --- 
एषा ब्राह्मी स्थिति: पार्थ नैनां प्राप्य विमुह्यति |
स्थित्वास्यामन्तकालेऽपि ब्रह्मनिर्वाणमृच्छति || 72||
eṣhā brāhmī sthitiḥ pārtha naināṁ prāpya vimuhyati
sthitvāsyām anta-kāle ’pi brahma-nirvāṇam ṛichchhati

### Transliteration 
 --- 
esha brahmi sthitih partha nainam prapya vimuhyati sthitvasyamantakalehapi brahmanirvanamricchati - 72-

### Translation 
 --- 
Listen about devotion to this Knowledge of Brahman, Dhananjaya Once this is attained, never is one captivated again If at the time of death this Knowledge of Brahman manifests One who dies in Its refuge merges into the Infinite - 72-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: It is this that is known as devotion to Brahman, meaning residing in Atman-Consciousness.  When this is attained, the jiva is never captivated again.  If one is in this state at the time of death, he merges into Brahman. - 72- SUMMARIZED DESCRIPTION OF CHAPTER 2: In this chapter, it has been expressed that when conflict disappears, an understanding happens in the Kutasthachaitanya that residing in this body of carnal passions and turning away from performing Kriya is not proper.  Thus, doing Kriya intensely with the fire element is proper [1 - 3].  But in the rajoguna, this type of discernment appears that - it is from the venerable and guru-like Chidabhas and samskara that we exist in this elevated state; therefore, to maintain this repulsive lordship, one should follow them birth after birth instead of destroying them.  Without them, our lives are meaningless [4 - 6].  As such, I cannot see anything that great or that wrong in performing or not performing Kriya.  I am unable to perceive; I am unable to do little harm for great gain; I have become powerless; I am unable to perform Kriya; I have no power of discrimination.  So, O Kutasthachaitanya, I take refuge in You.  Please teach me what is dutiful and what is not [7 - 9].  When this condition of openness occurs, Kutasthachaitanya is pleased and through inner perception, this type of unmanufactured truths are experienced [10].  Just as the physical body naturally goes through the manifestations of childhood, youth and old age, in the same way, the subtle body also naturally takes up another body after death.  But Consciousness is never destroyed, and that which is without a beginning is never born also.  The wise ones are never deluded by all these matters of birth and death.  Therefore, it is not right to just listen to clever sayings and become engaged in that.  Kriya should be taken up [11 - 13].  The one who is not distressed by the fleeting objects of pleasure and pain is the one who is qualified for the path of liberation.  Therefore, learning to endure these things is imperative [14 - 15].  This body and its faculties exist in appearance only; they remain only for a while and are impermanent.   The All-Pervading Consciousness is Eternal Substance; it is not destroyed by anything.  Therefore, one should destroy even this impermanent name along with the appearance of faculties and perform the Consciousness-revealing Kriya [16 - 18].  “This Causeless, Infinite, Eternal and ever-existing-as-Itself Atman is never destroyed with the body.  Only in ignorance is It perceived to be the slayer or the slain.”  Understanding this statement, no one endeavors to meaningless killing [19 - 21].  This Eternal, All-pervading, Universal Atman-substance cannot be corrupted by air, fire, water or weapons.  As if casting off worn-out clothing, He discards a body that no longer works and thereafter takes a new body.  Upon experiencing this Consciousness-substance, which is beyond the organs of perception, the organs of action and inner organs [mind], one should not grieve over the loss of these insignificant mental propensities etc. [22 - 25]  If one is deluded and ascertains that the Atman has birth and death, even then it is certain that if birth happens then there must be death, and if death happens then there must be birth.  It is not appropriate to lament over this unavoidable matter [26 -27].  This Eternal Consciousness cannot be killed.  From the unmanifest Nature of this Consciousness was this elemental world created, remaining in which - in the manifested state for a while - It merges back into Itself at the time of dissolution.  Therefore, why be sad over this?  When prajna is established by the Sadguru-graced Kriya, one is awed by experiencing all this; one is also at wonderment while speaking about this and listening to this, but unless the consciousness is stilled, it is not understandable, even upon hearing this over and over [28 - 30].  There is no other way for the embodied to be liberated besides this effortless Atman-dharma, by which one acquires the highest - the Bliss of Brahman [31 -32].  Turning away from this revelation of Consciousness causes doubt even in the existence of oneself and one falls into great delusion.  Then one becomes enslaved to the elemental world’s and the ego’s faculties and must go through great suffering [33 - 36].  But one acquires the Brahmanda with successful practice.  If one dies while practicing, then one dies without suffering and goes to the most excellent place as prescribed by the samskaras.  Therefore, gain and loss are the same.  Having such knowledge, one should endure impermanent pleasure and pain and be immersed in performing the Consciousness-revealing Kriya [37 - 38].  This is the jnanayoga of the wise ones.  It is imperative to do this yogakriya for the realization of this Knowledge.  The practice of this does not require all kinds of mental processes; self-discipline is enough.  Therefore, there is no possibility of any obstacles as well.  It is never unsuccessful.  Just a little performance of it destroys the suffering of the mind and brings contentment [39 - 41].  The Vedas and such treatises are filled with tempting methods to fulfill all kinds of desires based on sattva, raja and tama gunas.  Therefore, one should renounce the cravings for enjoyment, endure pleasure and pain, go beyond the three gunas, and reside in Tranquility, because those who are content in the Bliss of Brahman have no lack of happiness [42 - 46].  Therefore, yogakriya is the highest karma, not the trivial, result-hankering Vedic acts.  One should in no case disregard the practice of this [yogakriya].  No one has control over the result of any action; thus one should not be anxious over that.  Therefore, one should know success and failure as the same and be immersed in Kriya [47 - 49].  By knowing the method of this yogakriya, sages extinguish the perception of both good and wrong acts, liberate themselves from the bindings of this worldly life and attain Kaivalyapada [50 - 51].  The mind is captivated by many religious and secular matters.  When one goes beyond this fort of delusion, a non-attachment about all things manifests and a tranquil prajna is realized [52 - 53].  Upon having this experience, a certain enquiry arises in the rajoguna that:  who are called sthitaprajna; how do they teach; how do they reside; and how do they move? [54]  Then it is experienced in the Kutasthachaitanya that - withdrawing the senses as a tortoise pulls in its limbs, being without fear and anger, discerning happiness and unhappinesss as the same, being without desires of the mind and without affection or dislike for anything, and remaining content within oneself - are the signs of sthitaprajna [55 -58].  It is true that by fasting the senses become listless and turn away from sense pleasures, but the cravings do not end.  This is proved when the senses return to their healthy states and again capture the minds of even the most careful and highly knowledgeable ones.  Therefore, one should completely control the juggernaut of senses and reside in the Self.  This is the teaching of the ones with sthitaprajna [59 - 61].  Thinking about sense objects causes a liking for them which leads to obsession with having them.  At the lack of such things, anger arises which gives birth to delusion.  Delusion destroys memory and it prevents self-knowledge which makes one as if dead.  There is no possibility of tranquility without the revelation of Knowledge by yogakriya, and without tranquility happiness is difficult to attain.  When the senses are restless from thinking about sense objects, the mind follows them, and is like a boat at the mercy of winds on the sea, and thus wisdom is lost.  For this reason the ones with sthitaprajna detach themselves from the objects of sight, sound, touch etc., fulfill the partaking of sense objects without affection or hatred, eradicate pleasure and sorrow, and by doing so, live in divine cheerfulness with the mind at peace [62 - 68].  Not turning their attention to the things of sight, sound, touch etc. that stir the senses, completely filled with the Bliss of Brahman as the sea is filled with water, residing in an awakened state in the Kutastha which is inaccessible by the knowledge from the elemental world, renouncing attachment, desire and ego, fulfilling all of the resultant predestiny caused by the past like the rivers and streams gathering all their water and flowing into the sea, the ones with sthitaprajna are liberated from the entrapment of samsara.  Thus, they “move into”* Kaivalyapada.  Because of unending desires, those who are desirous take birth again and again and remain bound to this worldly life [69 - 71].  This [the state of the ones with sthitaprajna] is called residing in Atman-Consciousness, which is the death of all delusion.  If the jiva can be in this state at the time of death, it merges into the Supreme Vishnu and attains Kaivalyapada [72]. [*The quotation marks and the translated text within are in the original, defining how the ones with sthitaprajna move.] Thus ends the second chapter of the yogashastra upanishad Srimad Bhagavad Gita with analysis via various scriptures of this country and the West, along with spiritual commentary.