### Prose 
 --- 
धृतराष्ट्र उवाच |
धर्मक्षेत्रे कुरुक्षेत्रे समवेता युयुत्सवः |
मामकाः पाण्डवाश्चैव किमकुर्वत सञ्जय ||1||
dhṛitarāśhtra uvācha
dharma-kṣhetre kuru-kṣhetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ
māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāśhchaiva kimakurvata sañjaya

### Transliteration 
 --- 
dharmakshetre kurukshetre samaveta yuyutsavah mamakah pandavashchaiva kimakurvata sanjaya - 1 -

### Translation 
 --- 
Dhritarashtra said, “Listen, O Sanjaya!” The hundred with Duryodhana of mine With Yudhisthira the five sons of Pandu To fight they’ve come together What do they do in Dharmakshetra and Kurukshetra Tell me in detail all that is happening

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: It is written in the Mahabharata that Dhritarashtra, Pandu etc. were all from the lineage of the Maharaja Santanu. He had two wives - Ganga and Satyavati. Eight sons were born in the womb of Ganga. From which Ganga destroyed seven of them in the flow of her own waters immediately after birth, and the eighth was left and Ganga united with her own flow and disappeared. The name of this eighth son was Devabrata. He was supremely powerful and mighty. It is through the fire of this Devabrata, or Bhisma, that this kingdom of Bhaarat was to be saved. It is true that he settled to fight on behalf of the sons of Dhritarashtra, but he never lost himself in the work or enjoyment of the kingdom.  And Satyavati, who was formerly known as Matsyagandha, in whose womb the Maharshi Vedavyas fathered by the Maharshi Parashar was born - having become lotus-scented, she was immersed in the mantra-practice which she received from Maharshi Parashar to become the queen of the main king.  Maharaja Santanu, seeing the lotuses resulting from her worship floating in blue waters, became enraptured by her beauty and proposed to marry her, and then withdrew his proposal after seeing that Devabrata was the rightful king.  When he saw the despondent Santanu, Devabrata renounced his ownership of any kingdom, and in case a son would be born of him and cause problems in this, he vowed to remain unmarried in his natural life, and thereafter, to the great joy of Maharaja Santanu, he brought forth Satyavati and united Maharaja Santanu and her in marriage.  Two sons were born to Maharaja Santanu from Satyavati:  Chitrangada - the oldest, and Vichitravirya, the youngest.  The oldest became corrupted in demonic warfare, and Vichitravirya remained as himself on his own.  For the marriage of Vichitravirya, Devabrata-Bhisma brought forth Amba, Ambika and Ambalika, three daughters of the king Kashi.  In this, because Amba desired to marry Madraraj, Devabrata let her go and married Vichitravirya to the two others.Vichitravirya, enjoying his wives, became ill and died.  Later, fathered by Vedavyas - the son of Parashar who was born in the womb of Satyavati - Pandu was born of Ambalika and Dhritarashtra was born of Ambika.  Because Ambika closed her eyes upon seeing Vyasdeva, her conceived son was born blind, and because Ambalika was indifferent, her conceived son was born as Pandu [pale].  When Pandu found out that he was cursed and that he would die if he had intercourse with his wives, he renounced all desire of enjoyment and went to live in the woods.  He had two wives:  Kunti and Madri.  Kuntidevi knew a mantra that could attract gods.  To test this mantra, when she was unmarried, she called forth the sun god, Surya.  Karna was born, fathered by Suryadeva.  With the permission of her husband, Kuntidevi used the attraction-mantra on the lord of righteousness, Yama, from whom the righteous son Yudhisthira was born.  Thereafter, calling forth the supremely mighty and powerful wind-god, Pavandeva brought about the birth of the frighteningly powerful Bhima, and attracting the supremely fiery Indra who contained all qualities, brought forth Arjuna, who was excellent in all things.  Later, at the request of her husband, Kuntidevi taught that mantra to Madri, after which, Madri called to her the god of twins, Ashwinikumar.  From that the twin sons Nakula and Sahadeva were born.  Pleased at all of this, one day in springtime, Maharaj Pandu went for a private walk with Madri and having become stricken with the arrow of love, embraced Madri.  This resulted in his death.  Madri also killed herself feeling that she was the cause of her husband’s death.  Thereafter, Kuntidevi returned to her husband’s kingdom with the previously mentioned five children.  Later, those five Pandavas, along with their older cousin Duryodhana and his one hundred brothers, were educated by Kripacharya and Dronacharya.  At that time, Arjuna went and learned from many places and became extremely powerful.  Then, when the five Pandavas were expressing their power, Karna arrived and prostrated to them.  But Duryodhana and the one hundred brothers tricked the five Pandavas about the problems of their kingdom and took Karna to their side, and having his strength which made them very powerful, tried many ways to ruin the five Pandavas.  Falling prey to many of these trickeries, the Pandavas were forced to live in exile for twelve years in the woods, and one year in total anonymity in the kingdom of Birat.  Later, they were found out and tried to regain their kingdom with the help of Sri Krishna.  Now, let us see how we can understand this subject through spiritual scriptures. If we research into the subject of creation in the philosophical treatises, we find that this immense Universe is created out of two fundamental substances.  One is consciousness-substance and the other is matter-substance.  ParaBrahman is beyond this creation, tranquil and One.  Transcending all of the conditions of creation and becoming only Soul, in the state of kaivalya one experiences this Brahman-Consciousness.  The previously mentioned consciousness and matter are not separate from ParaBrahman, but are two types of nature being created from ParaBrahman.  In philosophy, this ParaBrahman beyond creation is called Parampurush, the consciousness substance in creation is called Purush and the matter substance is called Prakriti.  This is explained in detail in the seventh chapter of this book. The above mentioned Prakriti is unconscious, but because of the presence of Parampurush, as a magnet can magnetize a piece of metal, some consciousness becomes present in Prakriti, causing a transmutation.  This transmutation is called Mahattatva [great substance].satsannidhanakadhistatritvam manivat - Kapila sutra 1/99 The presence of this consciousness in Prakriti, bringing about Mahattatva, causes the arising of self-rulership in oneself.  This feeling of self-rulership is called Ahamkara.  Because of this, one thinks that one is his own lord.  But it is that Mahattatva that is the unseen ruler.  Due to this demonic thinking, the quality of Mahattatva eventually disappears and Ahamkara is established.  In Ahamkara, there is no sense of the present.  This is a god-like Ahamkara.  This world is created through many permutations of its power.  Because of the presence of Purush in this created substance, the infinite Universe, united with consciousness, is appearing. The cultivators of scripture saw this Universe to have manifested in three levels: physical, subtle and causal.  This visible world that is evident through the senses of cognition - that is called the physical universe.  The inner subtle elements (electricity)* that are present in every molecule and atom, and are carrying out the work of creation, preservation and transformation - this represents the subtle body of the Universe.  The cause of these elements, Nature with Her tamas, rajas and sattva gunas, is the causal body of the Universe.  This subject is focused upon in the 4th chapter of this book. *The parentheses and the text in English are in the original. In the scriptural treatises, there is the use of the words “samasti” and “vyasti”.  “Samasti” means totality and “vyasti” refers to the individual things within the totality, as in - the whole forest relates to samasti and every tree spread out within that forest relates to the concept of vyasti.  Samasti is the consciousness prevailing in the maya of the causal body of the Universe, called “Ishvar,” and the vyasti condition is the consciousness presiding unawares in the causal body of every created thing, called “praajna.”  Samasti is the consciousness present in the maya of the subtle body of the Universe, called “hiranyagarbha,” and vyasti is the consciousness present unawares in the subtle body of every created thing, called “taijas.”  In the samasti condition, consciousness prevailing in the physical body of the Universe is called “birat,” and in the vyasti state, consciousness present in the physical body of every created thing is called “vishva.”  The presiding consciousness is the same in samasti and vyasti.  Manifesting as samasti in maya it is Ishvar, hiranyagarbha and birat, and residing unawares as vyasti, it is praajna, taijas and vishva. This Consciousness-filled world is manifesting in these six ways.  To reveal this, Consciousness is present in another two ways.  In that, one is “Abhaschaitanya” or “Chidabhas” and the other is “Kutasthachaitanya” or “Sakshichaitanya.”   I am bringing forth an example from the eighth chapter of Panchadashi in order to explain this matter.  Just as in a dance-theater the light at once illuminates the proprietor, the audience and the dancer/actors in the same way but is not involved in anything that they are doing, and remains the light whether they are there or not, so is Kutasthachaitanya, Who remains apart from the sensory work of seeing, hearing, etc. and all of their objects and is uninvolved in ego, intellect etc.  He simply reveals the truth of them with His own Light, and remains the same Self-Effulgent One whether they are there or not.   Whatever is thought of by the human mental-intelligence, this Kutasthachaitanya is the witness to that, therefore Its name is “Sakshichaitanya.”  And It Itself is uninvolved with any work, thing or authority, not part of any of these states, and is completely incorruptible and totally in the present.  Because of this, Its name is “Kutasthachaitanya.”   Kutabinnikarane sthiti ity kutastha, meaning, the word “kuta” is the goldsmith’s anvil.  Regardless of all the gold and other materials that are transformed from their convoluted states into beautiful things, He remains unchanged and in the present, like the goldsmith’s anvil.  This Light of Consciousness lives with all souls and reveals all about their minds, but mind is not able to know Him.  The smallest thing is appearing because of Kutashthachaitnya, but the individual soul is not able to know that.  And the jiva also has a natural internal light.  When, because of the jiva’s mind, that light falls upon some thing, then that thing is revealed double its existence, and the knowledge of its function in the jiva happens.  This internal light of the jiva is also seen under the Light of Kutasthachaitanya.  This internal light of the jiva is only a reflection of that Light of Kutasthachaitanya.  Its existence is in the Existence of Kutasthachaitanya.  Does that mean that there is no light of the jiva itself?  Of course there is.  But that light has only the quality of reflection.  Without the Light of Kutasthachaitanya, it is darkness.  Just as without external light no knowledge of anything is possible with one’s own light, in the same way, unless all things are revealed unknowingly by the Light of Kutasthachaitanya, no thing could be revealed by the mind of the jiva.  That internal light is called “Abhaschaitanya” or “Chidabhas.”  In the maya and unawareness of creation, Consciousness is present in this way, represented by these eight names.  In that, seven of those, being indistinguishable in the Infinite-Consciousness-Nature, is not experienced in separate forms.  Only the Abhaschaitanya or Chidabhas is experienced because it happens to work with the constructs of the mind.  This Abhaschaitanya is not enmeshed in the workings of worldly life nor its enjoyment. It can clearly be understood now that Santanu (samam vikarashunyam tanuryarsya)[fn 1] is the Unchanging, beyond creation, Brahman-Consciousness.  He has two (wives)[fn 2] Prakriti.  Ganga is the Consciousness-Prakriti (gang brahmandam gacchati ity)[fn 3] and Satyavati is the Matter-Prakriti (satyam chaitanyam vidyate adhitisthati yasyam)[fn 4].  From the above-mentioned Consciousness-Prakriti, the eight children are born:  Ishvar, Vaishvanar, Birat, Praajna, Taijas, Vishva, Kutasthachaitanya and Abhaschaitanya - these eight rays of Consciousness appear.  In these, seven are not perceived (they are immersed in the waters of Ganga)[fn 5] - immersed in the flow of Consciousness.  When the eighth (Devabrata)[fn 6], Abhaschaitanya, appears, then (Ganga)[fn 7] the Consciousness-Prakriti Herself disappears, uniting with her own flow.  That Abhaschaitanya is now present as the supremely mighty one in this body (kingdom)[fn 8].  Even though he works with the constructs of the mind, he does not rule over nor is he enmeshed in any of the enjoyment.  The entire world (kingdom)[fn 9] is manifested because of the light of this Abhaschaitanya (the power of Bhisma)[fn 10]. [fn 1 - 10:  All of the parentheses and the text within are in the original.] The aforementioned three-guna-filled Matter-Nature (Satyavati)[fn 1], the one who was spoken about in the introduction of this book, the one who by the Grace of Sadguru received his fire and perceived in Yonimudra the Penetrating Knowledge which was established there, renounces the mad addiction and in order to unite with the Main King of the Universe, the beyond-creation, Satchitananda-filled, Brahman-Consciousness, she becomes immersed in the practice of the Guru-instructed Kriya.  By that Kriya, she experiences through the flow of Consciousness in the spine the revelation of the six lotus-chakras located there (she meets Santanu)[fn 2].  But because of the Abhaschaitanya (Devabrata Bhisma)[fn 3] still turning toward worldly enjoyment, she is unable to meet Him.  Then, upon seeing the disappointment of the Brahman-Consciousness (Santanu’s disappointment)[fn 4], the Abhaschaitanya (Devabrata Bhisma)[fn 5] renounces all worldly enjoyments and to prevent the disruption of this renunciation, decides to remain unattached (unmarried)[fn 6] from all physical shakti.  In this way, the Abhaschaitanya (Devabrata Bhisma)[fn 7] turns Nature (Satyavati)[fn 8] inward and unites her with Brahman-Consciousness (Santanu)[fn 9] and expresses his joy in that.  When one turns the mind in this way by the Sadguru-instructed Kriya and, being established in renunciation, one directly experiences the eternal joyfulness of Brahman-Consciousness.  When human nature is united with Consciousness, then the part of foundation of the appearing body of creation called Mahattatva (Chitrangada)[fn 10] is known, and along with that a sense of self-rulership arises, which is called Aishwarik Ahamkara (Vichitravirya)[fn 11].  Then one sees oneself as the lord of creation, preservation and transformation of this Universe.  When this realization was complete in Rajarshi Janaka, he said, “Oh, how incredible I am!!  I bow to myself.  There is no one equal to me.  Without touching it with by body, I am containing this world.”  As in - aho aham namasyahaham daksho nastiha matsamah asamsprishya sharirena maya vishvam chiram dhritam - [Ashtavakrasamhita - 2nd part - 13][fn 12] [fn 1 - 11:  All of the parentheses and the text within are in the original. fn 12:  The brackets and the reference within are in the original.] From this inner realization, the sense of Mahattatva eventually disappears and the feeling of that god-like Ahamkara remains.  This sense is not revealed in the jiva.  To experience the individual part of that Aishwarik Ahamkara (bringing forth a son)[fn 1], the daughters of  the knowledge-race of the king Kashi (ranjan kashate ity Kashiraj, meaning, knowledge, revealing everything, by which he rules):  amba - sense of experience, ambika - sense of questioning or doubt, and ambalika - sense of certainty - these three things come to being through the Chidabhas (Devabrata Bhisma)[fn 2].  In that, amba - the sense of experience, ddesiring to unite with the fire in the area below the navel (Madraraj - mad ra: madra)[fn 3], leaves these other two to unite with that Aishwarik Ahamkara.  The union with the senses of doubt and certainty causes the Aishwarik Ahamkara to be lost.  Then by the Guru-given Knowledge of Insight (by Vedavyas)[fn 4], the Dhritarashtra-mind (dhritam rashtram yena)[fn 5] is experienced from the sense of doubt.  But inner doubt puts itself in sight of the eyes all the time - this is why the mind also becomes restless and therefore cannot observe anything with steadiness.  Seeing the mind being in a blind condition, by that Knowledge of Insight, the Pandu-perception (non-descriptive, transparent)[fn 6] is born out of the sense of certainty.   This perception can steadily observe all things; no thing can color it.  It is always clean (Pandu)[fn 7], description-less. [fn 1 - 7:  All of these parentheses and the text within are in the original.] Because of the difference in qualities, sadhakas have divided this body into these four parts:  upper, lower, front and back.  The upper part is the northern division, full of divine power and revealer of divine manifestations; the lower part is the southern division and the cause of delusionary madness.  The front part is the eastern division causing the pravritti-oriented involvement and enjoyment of worldly things, and the back is the western division, the nivritti-oriented renouncer of wordly enjoyment and the bestower of liberation.  Even being blind, the mind still moves towards pravritti-driven pleasures of worldly life and is in the front (kingdom)[fn 1] of the body.  And intellect, fearful of its own destruction if it mingles with any physical forces remains detached and in the back of the body (away from the kingdom)[fn 2].  This intellect’s field (wives)[fn 3] is the sushumna power located in the spine which is divided in two parts.  The section above the navel has the ability to call forth divine forces - her name is Kunti (kun dhatu ahvane)[fn 4] - and the segment below the navel has the power to cause delusionary intoxication - her name is Madri (mad dhatu matta kara)[fn 5].  Before Kunti is united with intellect (married to Pandu)[fn 6], she calls forth the sun-god Surya by her ability, from which the very powerful Karna is born, settling between the eyebrows representing the door of the sushumna and ruling over the pravritti-causing front part of the body.  Then, having united with intellect and now on the path revealed through intellect (her husband’s permission)[fn 7], because of having no relations, she calls forth the king of righteousness Yama and gives birth to the steady and righteous ether-element (Yudhisthira)[fn 8] in the area of the throat in the Vishuddhakhya lotus; then she calls to her the force of the incredibly mighty wind-god Pavana, which gives birth to the frighteningly powerful air-element (Bhima)[fn 9] in the Anahata lotus in the heart; and then by the seed of the supremely fiery, containing all qualities Indra, the fire-element (Arjuna)[fn 10] is born, the one excellent in all talents, in the lotus named Manipura, located in the area of the navel.  Later, when by intelligence that shakti goes below the navel area (teaching the mantra to Madri at her husband’s request)[fn 11], with the seed of the extremely beautiful Ashwinikumar, at once the water-element (Nakula)[fn 12] is born in the Swadhisthana chakra in the area of the sex organ, and the earth element (Sahadeva)[fn 13] takes birth in the Muladhara chakra located in the area of the anus.  Enjoying the beauty of these five elements in his field (his wives)[fn 14], because of the power of delusionary intoxication under the navel (in Madri)[fn 15], the intellect embraces her and according to natural ways (because of the previous curse)[fn 16], intellect is destroyed, and the delusionary power (Madri seeing herself as the cause of the her husband’s death)[fn 17], dies herself with intellect (sahamrita)[fn 18].  In this way, after the destruction of the delusionary power through her union with intellect, the five elements establish themselves as rulers of their individual chakras, from the Muladhar to the Vishuddha with their specific divine powers. Then, the five elements (returning to the kingdom)[fn 1] becoming present in the body, with the characteristics of mind including vanity etc.(the sons of Dhritarashtra as in Duryodhana - durdu-stam yudham yasya - the ability to fight in an evil way)[fn 2], and accompanied by grace (krip)[fn 3] and its kin shakti (kripipati)[fn 4], come to know the particulars - samskaras - of bodily life.  These particulars are extremely powerful and very important in worldly life.  Under these particulars, people do every kind of work.  No one can do any work beyond these.  But when the element of highest importance, fire (Arjuna)[fn 5] is revealed, through his fire and by the many Guru-given methods one can become more powerful than these samskaras.  When this fire element (Arjuna)[fn 6] is about to realize its fire, the duties of worldly life (Kuntidevi’s illegitimate son Karna)[fn 7] appear at his side (the pravritti part of the nivritti side)[fn 8].  The mental ways with vanity etc. (Duryodhana and his group)[fn 9] then take the power of Karna and in order to cause trouble in one’s duty (the obtaining of the kingdom)[fn 10], apply many kinds of trickeries. [fn 1 - 10:  All of these parentheses and the text within them are in the original.] In this way, the five elements, having lost to the pravritti side - meaning the power of Karna, their own brother at the front-facing twin-petaled lotus, whose power is being used by the constructs of the mind - spend twelve very difficult years in brahmacharya, studying etc.  Then for one more year, they spend time immersed in the godly Consciousness present in maya (anonymously in the kingdom of Birat)[fn 1], meaning remain in the sadhana for liberation from Birat.  Then after coming out, they try to reclaim their own kingdom with the help of Sri Krishna.  Now, the Supreme Person in this scripture is Sri Krishna Chaitanya.  Meditating on Him, it is known that He resides in the bosom of Radha. Sa, ra and ee - the word “sri” is sounded by these three letters.  And “Krishna” is a separate word.  Sa - beneficent, ra - seed of fire, ee - shakti and Krishna is dark.  When these are put together it can be understood that the fire element, meaning the dark form that is revealed by the beneficent power of fire in the bosom of the lightning/electric form of Radhika - that is Sri Krishna.  In other words, when one takes the fire filled with the sattvic guna up to a place between the eyebrows (it an be known from the mouth of Guru)[fn 2], the physical lightning (animal electricity)[fn 3] collects in stillness and becomes like a flame and instantly a dark circle appears in the middle of that lightning.  That is called Sri Krishna or the third eye.  The Consciousness that is present there is called by saints as Kutasthachaitanya or Sri Krishna Chaitanya.  The entire Universe is in this Kutasthachaitanya.  When this is established, this infinite Universe is experienced as if in the palm of one’s own hand and nothing remains unknown. [fn 1 - 2:  The parentheses and the text within are in the original. fn 3:  The parentheses and the text within in English are in the original.] Now, this first sloka is like this:  as in - After having established the Knowledge of Insight from Sadguru and having taken the help of Kutasthachaitanya (Sri Krishna)*, what are the mental constructs and the five elements from the field of intellect who have come together in this field of the body doing?  To observe this, the king of the imagination of this world, mind, is using his own divine sight. *The parentheses and the text within are in the original.