### Prose 
 --- 
तस्मादज्ञानसम्भूतं हृत्स्थं ज्ञानासिनात्मन: |
छित्त्वैनं संशयं योगमातिष्ठोत्तिष्ठ भारत || 42||
tasmād ajñāna-sambhūtaṁ hṛit-sthaṁ jñānāsinātmanaḥ
chhittvainaṁ sanśhayaṁ yogam ātiṣhṭhottiṣhṭha bhārata

### Transliteration 
 --- 
tasmadajnana sambhutam hritstham jnanasinatmanah chhittvainam samshayam yogamatishthottisshtha bharata - 42-

### Translation 
 --- 
Therefore, when doubt appears towards Knowledge Cut it by the sword of discrimination of the Atman in the body Listen Bharata, perform karma Get up and fight now, virtuous and wise one - 42-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: Therefore, discarding laziness and cutting up all doubt in the heart by the sword of the Sadguru-initiated Knowledge, one should perform yogakriya. - 42- SUMMARIZED DESCRIPTION OF CHAPTER 4: According to the teaching of the preceding chapter, experiencing the Atman-Consciousness and focusing the mind with devotion in That, it can be understood that the all-pervading Eternal Consciousness is within the human body firstly as the sun-consciousness, by which It becomes present at the door of sushumna in the Ajna chakra, from the Ajna chakra It is then present in the other chakras existing in the sushumna, and from them It is spread in the subtlest of ways within the nadis throughout the body, and is manifesting the body as it appears.  Later, it becomes known in the fire element that when the sun is revealed by the practice of Kriya, by that the Kutasthachaitanya is experienced.  Thus - how is it possible that the sun is present due to the Kutasthachaitanya?  Then it is experienced in the Kutasthachaitanya that although Consciousness is without birth or death and is the ruler of the Universe, because of Its presence in Prakriti, It reveals Itself with the elements again and again in the body.  Ordinary people are not aware of this.  But once Kutasthachaitanya is established, then all is experienced.  When unawareness of Consciousness covers Prakriti, it faces outward and the world-Brahmanda is created within.  Through pranayam, all of those faculties are extinguished and by the gradual evolution of the condition of being, the Infinite Consciousness is revealed within and one merges into the Brahman-Substance.  One no longer has to take birth in this samsara again and again.  Whatever type of karma [action] one does yields that type of result.  Not being able to understand the consequences in the future, ordinary people become engaged in the service of the senses, lusting after the acquisition of instantaneous pleasure.  But, understanding the eternity of the Bliss of Brahman, sadhakas renounce like and dislike and by fearless and one-pointed practice of meditation, they attain the Knowledge of Atman and remain in a state of oneness with the Brahman-Substance.  It is true that the four varnas such as “brahmins” etc. are created because of gradation of the manifestation of Consciousness, but Consciousness is never less in some place nor more in another; It is present the same everywhere.  This idea of the manifestation of Consciousness as being more in one place and less in another is not created by Consciousness; this idea exists because of ignorance.  In this way, all karma is of ignorance, and understanding that Atman-Consciousness is completely uninvolved in that [karma], the sages of the past attained liberation.  Therefore, one should desirelessly remain unattached from all types of karma.  Among karma [action], some should be done and some should not be done - the understanding of this and the way of residing in non-attached tranquility from all karma - the secrets of these are veery difficult to know.  Even very great and knowledgeable beings are unable to comprehend these things.  Therefore, instead of relying upon ordinary intellect, one should discern among these things from a state of mind that is completely controlled and focused.  The one who knows heat and cold or success and failure to be the same, who is not a slave to any senses of the body, who has renounced all cravings and is satisfied with whatever comes effortlessly, who works to simply maintain the workings of the body with disciplined mind, desirelessly and without confusion and doubt, all of this person’s work is devoid of the bindings of future results and [his work] is transformed into “akarma” [non-action].  And the one with akarma, meaning the one with the purpose of having no attachment to results of any karma, who takes up yogakriya in the Kutastha with disciplined and focused mind, is the truly intelligent being.  Even while engaged in all types of work, he remains in samadhi of the Consciousness of the Self.  The seers of Oneness know this world-Brahmanda to be completely filled with Brahman, and thus, they practice experiencing Him in all types of work.  Hatha yogis practice the control of the senses by certain techniques.  Jnana yogis surrender every karma to Kutasthachaitanya and try to live in non-attached tranquility.  Brahmacharis try to pacify the senses by pratyahara [withdrawal] etc.  Those disciplined in meditation practice the surrender of the work of all senses and even the workings of prana itself to Kutasthachaitanya.  Asectics take extreme vows and by the use of medication and difficult practices, try to steady the body, and by certain yogic practices and studying scriptures of liberation, they try to illuminate knowledge within themselves.  Other yogis practice the stillness of knowledge by rechak and purak of pranayam, stopping the movement of prana and apana.  And some others try to extinguish the outgoing faculties by disciplined eating.  The fruits of all of these yogic practices can be successfully attained by Kriya, and when Knowledge is illuminated by this, all kriyas [methods] are finished.  After reverently serving and asking questions regarding these things to the wise ones of Self-Knowledge, when one receives the answers and practices accordingly, one can no longer be stupefied by maya.  By this, sadhakas become free of everything and sinless, aware of all things in the Universe within themselves, and finally seeing themselves as the Infinite Consciousness, they attain the Infinite Bliss of the Brahman-Substance.  But those without Kriya are not able to be successful in acquiring even the happiness of the physical world, far be it to speak of the spiritual Bliss of Brahman.  There is nothing more pure and higher than Knowledge in this world; this Knowledge of the Self is revealed by yogakriya.  Just as the blaze of a fire burns dry wood all into ashes, in the same way this Knowledge burns the seeds - rendering them fruitless for the future - of all karma of even the worst of sinners, and thus liberating them from the ocean of samsara.  The reverent, one-pointed and disciplined sadhakas in yogakriya gain Knowledge and attain liberation, and all work of the ignorant ones practicing yogakriya with irreverence or with doubt become corrupted.  The apprehensive ones engaged in doubt have to remain bound to all kinds of physical, subtle and other kinds of ordinary pleasures.  With the sword of Sadguru-initiated Knowledge cutting apart all doubt in the heart, and residing non-attached and contentedly in Atman-Consciousness through the performance of yogakriya, jivas can become liberated from all karma.  Therefore, one should abandon all laziness and, with a mind that is free of doubt, perform this yogakriya. Thus ends the fourth chapter of the yogashastra upanishad Srimad Bhagavad Gita with analysis via various scriptures of this country and the West, along with spiritual commentary.