### Prose 
 --- 
भोक्तारं यज्ञतपसां सर्वलोकमहेश्वरम् |
सुहृदं सर्वभूतानां ज्ञात्वा मां शान्तिमृच्छति || 29||
bhoktāraṁ yajña-tapasāṁ sarva-loka-maheśhvaram
suhṛidaṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ jñātvā māṁ śhāntim ṛichchhati

### Transliteration 
 --- 
bhoktaram yajnatapasam sarvalokamaheshvaram suhridam sarvabhutanam jnatva mam shantimricchati - 29-

### Translation 
 --- 
Knowing the Lord of All as receiver of yajna and all good work Realize Me and quickly attain liberation - 29-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: By the aforementioned Kriya, when sadhakas see Infinite Consciousness as being in everything - up to the Ultimate - as the receiver of all yajna, spiritual practices, etc. Who is residing as the liberation-bestowing Lord in the form of Paramatman - when this is realized, they see all things of the Cosmos as the Self. Thus, they have the Universe-pervading experience that there is nothing other than Atman-Consciousness in the Universe. This is what the great sages have called “Kevalatva” or “Kaivalyapada.” - 29- SUMMARIZED DESCRIPTION OF CHAPTER 5 When sadhakas are in the state of absorption in the Kutastha, many wonderful facets of the yoga of performing Kriya and the yoga of renouncing all action, as expressed in previous chapters, are experienced; then a desire to know which is the greater of these occurs in the energy of the rajoguna. At this, an experience happens by Kutasthachaitanya that performing yogakriya and renouncing all karma by residing in a state of non-doing - when either is practiced with complete focus - one can attain Kaivalyapada. The wise see both as of the same stature; only the immature and ignorant think that these two are different. Even if the organs of perception - sight, hearing, touch, smell, and taste, the organs of action - speech, receiving, motion, excretion and urination, the inner organs - mind, observation, understanding, intellect and dreams are all engaged in their respective work, Kriyavan sadhakas as Atman-Consciousness reside separately from the sense-body in tranquil non-attachment. This is because they are devoid of conflicts brought about by affinity and dislike etc., and they are not attached to those works. Therefore, even though they work, they are renunciates of all work and ever the sannyasis. In this way, the condition of sannyas can be attained with ease. But trying to attain this state without yogakriya leads only to suffering. Therefore, although either the performance of Kriya or the renunciation of all action are both liberation-endowing, the performance of Kriya is better. Atman-Consciousness, the Lord of this miniature Cosmos of the body is not involved in any work. It does not cause any other to be involved, nor does It have any craving to enjoy any karmic bhoga. Therefore, no diminution or expansion happens to Atman-Consciousness due to the routine workings of the body; only the prakriti of the jiva is affected. Atman-Consciousness is eternally immaculate and eternally immutable. All worldly work is being done by Its natural law through Maya. Other than partaking due to one’s own desire, no one has to be a recipient of its fruits. By ignorance or unawareness, wisdom is veiled, and because jivas are connected to that and enraptured by that, they cannot understand this. By yogakriya this ignorance is destroyed and when the all-exposing sun-like Knowledge of Atman-Consciousness is revealed, all of these things are understood. Then sadkakas, by having worn away prarabdha, for the sake of self-purification having renounced all desires to partake/enjoy, being united and immersed in Atman-Consciousness, residing in Supreme Happiness in the city of nine gates or the body, not being enmeshed as the Self during all works of the world nor causing anyone to be enmeshed in such, having renounced all karma, and accomplishing all work at hand by the body, mind, intellect and the senses alone, live liberated from the sufferings of samsara. But jivas without Kriya, being under the stupor of ignorance, see themselves as doing all the works by the body etc., and thereby desiring to enjoy the fruits of such work, remain bound to this samsara. When Self-Knowledge is revealed, the differences in a cow, an elephant, a dog and such classes of nature, or the differences between a highly educated and humble Kriyavan brahmin or a low-kriya [disrespectful action] oriented base person and the differences even within one class with the innumerable permutations of Prakriti manifesting - despite the differences, the sadhakas experience the Self in all things as the unalloyed and immutable Brahman-Consciousnesss existing everywhere equally. Thus, they are not overly elated at gaining something desirable, nor are they despondent over having gotten something undesirable. In this way, having destroyed all distortions and ideas of dissimilarity in the mind, with steadiness of perception, sadhakas are freed from all delusions in the world, and having eradicated and become victorious over birth and death, they attain that immutable and all-pervading state of equanimity of the Brahman-State. The wise know that all of these fleeting and momentary pleasures of bhoga, which are of the sense-objects, are the wellspring of all suffering, and they are not attracted by them. If attachment to all these lust- and anger-force-produced desires of bhoga can be checked and ended, then jivas can gain happiness within, and being immersed in Atman-Consciousness, in the end, having become one with that Infinite Consciousness, attain the indestructible happiness of Tranquility. Understanding all this, Kriyavans and sadhakas who know the Self eliminate all conflict and doubt, renounce all partaking/enjoyment associated with sense-objects, discipline the mind, intellect and the senses, become free from the forces of lust, anger etc. by having attained liberation, with a consciousness devoid of desire, fear and anger, focus wholly within where the eyebrows unite and where Consciousness in the form of Light is revealed, equally still prana and apana, gain complete steadfastness within, attain the highest samadhi of asamprajnata state, eradicate the greatly destructive ignorance and all samskaras, and realizing oneself to be that Infinite Consciousness in all elements as the Self who is enjoyer of all spiritual work, they become one with all things, pervading all in the Cosmos and attain the indestructible Supreme Happiness of Kaivalyapada. Thus ends the fifth chapter of the yogashastra upanishad Srimad Bhagavad Gita with analysis via various scriptures of this country and the West, along with spiritual commentary.