### Prose 
 --- 
ज्ञानेन तु तदज्ञानं येषां नाशितमात्मन: |
तेषामादित्यवज्ज्ञानं प्रकाशयति तत्परम् || 16||
jñānena tu tad ajñānaṁ yeṣhāṁ nāśhitam ātmanaḥ
teṣhām āditya-vaj jñānaṁ prakāśhayati tat param

तद्बुद्धयस्तदात्मानस्तन्निष्ठास्तत्परायणा: |
गच्छन्त्यपुनरावृत्तिं ज्ञाननिर्धूतकल्मषा: || 17||
tad-buddhayas tad-ātmānas tan-niṣhṭhās tat-parāyaṇāḥ
gachchhantyapunar-āvṛittiṁ jñāna-nirdhūta-kalmaṣhāḥ

### Transliteration 
 --- 
jnanena tu tadajnanam yesham nashitamatmanah teshamadityavajjnanam prakashayati tatparam - 16- tadbuddhayastadatmanastannishthastat parayanah gacchantyapunaravrittim jnananirdhuta kalmashah - 17-

### Translation 
 --- 
One whose ignorance is destroyed by this Knowledge He is revealed the God-Substance As the rising sun dispels darkness In the same way their bindings are destroyed - 16- One who absorbs mind and intellect in that Firmly and solely are they in the Refuge Extinguishing all sin by Knowledge Ending birth and death, they leave - 17-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: What attachment to partaking/enjoyment [bhoga] and salvation, meaning liberation, are - if they are not clearly explained, then there is a significant possibility of confusion arising in trying to understand sevveral circuitous slokas of this chapter. Therefore, what is written in Patanjal Darshan about the aforementioned bhoga and salvation from it are being explained below. Purusha, meaning jivatman, is the immutable Consciousness-Substance. Prakriti, being in the presence of this Consciousness and being Its mirror, creates a new type of substance, as iron is energized in the presence of a magnet, and by this manifests as the numerous elemental and sensory objects and their workings. All of these elemental and all internal and external sensory matter - up until the Absolute - are imbued with the three gunas: revelatory sattva, active rajas, and veiling and inertia-producing tamas. These comprise what is called “drishya” [scene, or that which is seen/perceived]. In this way, Prakriti, a reflection of Consciousness manifesting as the innumerable things, is experienced in the jiva-consciousness. This is why the jiva-consciousness is usually called “drashta” [perceiver/witness]. When in order to perceive these perceptible things [drishya padartha] the jiva-consciousness joins Prakriti-Shakti, sound, touch, sight, taste, scent, pleasure and pain etc. manifest as the innumerable things and are experienced by the jiva. This is what is called the jiva’s “bhoga.” In this way, all of these perceptible things or the matters of bhoga are only mutations of Consciousness by the Prakriti-Shakti union. Thus, this Consciousness is the Soul-Self of these innumerable perceptible things. Just as the intoxicated state of mind caused by drinking liquor seems to be pleasure to the drinker of liquor, in the same way, the state caused by partaking [bhoga] in sensory matters seems to be pleasure for the undiscriminating. But if one does a little thoughtful analysis, one can see that it is because of being under the power of this need to partake/enjoy [bhoga] that jivas are unable to have peace. Just as throwing clarified butter in fire causes the fire to burn more instead of extinguishing it, in the same way, instead of peace, the partaking/enjoying causes desire and cravings to grow, and by that jivas become intensely engaged in fulfilling desires, incurring great suffering. (“na jatu kamah kamanamupabhogena samyati. habishakrishnavartmaiva bhuya evabhivardhate.”) Thus, sorrow is the end result of all bhoga. One suffers greatly by constantly thinking about and trying to maintain and protect the things to be enjoyed [matters of bhoga]. Thus, this bhoga is accompanied by sorrow, or suffering. The samskaras [tendencies] that are born of this bhoga are also full of suffering. For example, the samskara arising from becoming attached to the bhoga of seating in a plush velvet seat in a beautifully perfumed place causes displeasure at sitting in any other condition in the world. Staying even a moment at any place causes great suffering. Because these momentary and fleeting enjoyments are imbued with the sattva, rajas and tamas gunas, they are often at odds with each other and this also brings tremendous suffering to the jiva. Knowing all bhoga to be filled with sorrow because of these reasons, the discriminating ones take care to renounce all partaking/enjoyment of sense objects. By delusion, ignorance and unawareness, the five kleshas [afflictions] with affinity, hate etc. arise in the perceptible matters of the jiva, and in order to fulfill the experiences of partaking accordingly, the jiva-consciousness remains in a distorted state, bound to the power of Prakriti. Stilling the fluctuations of consciousness by yogakriya and thereby being the perceiver/witness, the source of the five kleshas, meaning the field of ignorance, delusion or Prakriti, from which all bhoga has arisen, is revealed, and experiencing the Substance hidden within all bhoga, or that Consciousness as the Self in them, jivas are no longer bound to Prakriti for the purpose of bhoga. In this way, when ignorance is destroyed and attachment is no more, all distortion vanishes, and the entire Cosmos is revealed as the Jiva-Consciousness-Self. This is what is called salvation or liberation in the scriptural treatises. Therefore, those who can understand the secret matter of these things that are perceptible - which act as the provider of bhoga for the undiscriminating ones - those discriminating ones are prepared for the gift of liberation. In this way, jivas experience themselves as the Self in all things in the world-Brahmanda and realize themselves as pervading all things in the Universe. Therefore, in the Cosmos, there is no experience of a second anything separate from the Self. This type of state is called the Purusha’s or jiva’s “kevalatva” or “Kaivalya” state of existence. When this state is attained, then all bhoga and desires are devoid, and jivas do not ever again have to take birth in this samsara. “prakashakriyasthitishilam bhutendriyatmakam bhogapavargartham drishyam” -  2-18 “drashadrishimatrah shuddhohpi pratyanupashyah” -  2-20 “swaswamishaktyah swarupopalabdhihetuh samyogah” -  2-23 “tadartha eva drishyatma” -  2-21 “parinama tapasamskara duhkaigurnavrittivirodhaccha sarvameva duhkham vivekakinah” -  2-15 “tasya heturavidyah” -  2-24 “yogashchittavritti nirodhah” -  1-2 “tadadrashtuh svarupehvasthanam” -  1-3 “avidyakshetramuttaresham prasupta tanuvicchinnodayanam” -  2-4 “anityashuchiduhkhanatmasu nityashuchi sukhatma khyatirvidya” -  2-5 “tadabhavat samyogabhabvohanam tadvasheh kaivalam” -  2-25 Now, it can be clearly understood in these two slokas that as jivas gradually realize Atman-Consciousness by the Sadguru-instructed Kriya and thereby eradicate the manifestation of this greatly destructive unawareness, meaning ignorance, that all-revealing Knowledge like the sun reveals this infinite Universe and the entire Cosmos, and thus they gradually experience that Supreme Substance Infinite Consciousness. In this way, having eliminated the presence and effect of ignorance, when by doubt-free and steady perception that Infinite Consciousness is experienced, the wise and discriminating sadhakas, remaining self-disciplined and keeping the consciousness engaged in Atman and apart from all bhoga, take refuge in that Infinite Consciousness and become liberated from this horrific, destructive suffering of samsara. These types of “jivanmukta” [liberated while alive in the body] sadhakas never again have to be bound to take birth in the world. - 16 and 17-