### Prose 
 --- 
न त्वेवाहं जातु नासं न त्वं नेमे जनाधिपा |
न चैव न भविष्याम: सर्वे वयमत: परम् || 12||
na tvevāhaṁ jātu nāsaṁ na tvaṁ neme janādhipāḥ
na chaiva na bhaviṣhyāmaḥ sarve vayamataḥ param

### Transliteration 
 --- 
na tvevaham jatu nasam na tvam neme janadhipah na chaiva na bhavishyamah sarve vayamatahparam - 12-

### Translation 
 --- 
The Supreme Lord, Myself, these persons of royalty And you, it was never that we did not exist That we will not be in the future For that to happen is impossible The Blissful Consciousness Paramatman is eternal Neither is He born and nor does He ever die Only because of this strife this appearance and disappearance It is not possible to grieve over this -  12-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: Before commenting on this sloka, it is necessary to clarify what the substance of these matters are. Tattva, meaning karan (cause) -   sattva (neutral), raja (positive) and tama (negative) -   these three gunas working together are called Trigunamayi Prakrriti.  The gunas themselves are the cause of creation.  As in - sattvarajastamasam samyavastha prakritih prakritermahan mahato ityadi -   K. Su. - 1:61 It is written in the Patanjal philosophical treatises that the three gunas mentioned above, the five elements and the eleven sensory faculties form the scenery of purush or jivachaitanya.  The jiva enjoys objects through these and when awareness manifests about their behavior, it is also by these that liberation is attained.  Among the above-mentioned three gunas, the sattva guna is tranquil and still in an awakened state, while the tama guna is inert with stupor.  Only the rajoguna is ever-moving, meaning operative.  As in - prakashkriyasthitishilam bhutendriatmakam bhogapavargartham drishyam -   Sadhanapada - no. 18 The above-mentioned raja guna being the one with the capacity for action, is mixed with the sattva guna and tama guna giving rise to two different forms - rajasik sattva and rajasik tama.  By the Guru-instructed Kriya, in the Kutasthachaitanya the sadhakas experience the gunas of Nature as these five types.  As in - darpane samalokya tatra shvasam vinikshipet -   Svarodaya “Darpan” (drp-un)[mirror]:  that by which the forms of all things are illuminated, meaning that by which things are reflected.  With the exception of physical objects, what is ordinarily called “darpan” does not reflect mind, intellect or any such internal things.  For this reason, that darpan is only a model and does not convey the complete function of darpan.  It has been touched upon previously and it is also written in every other scripture that this body is the place of all pilgrimages, the place of all gods, and all knowledge is present in it.  One becomes aware of this through the teachings of Guru.  As in - dehasthah sarvavidyashcha dehasthah sarvadevatah dehasthani cha tirthani guruvakyena labhyate Thus, in this body itself there is a place where by the experience of Kutasthachaitanya the physical, subtle and the subtlest of subtle qualities of Nature are experienced.  The scriptural scholars have stated this as the true darpan.  Because Kutasthachaitanya is experienced here, this is also called “Kutastha.” kutasthe kalpita buddhistatrachitprativimbakam -   Panchadashi The saints knowledgeable in yogic scriptures have referred to the above-mentioned five types of states which represent the cause of Nature as the five elements.  In the clear mind of the field of Pandu - the sushumna - these five elements are experienced in their pure states.  This is why the Mahabharata has called these the five Pandavas, the doubt-ridden and blind mind Dhritarashtra, and the different types of quintelemental and sensory internal faculties and elements as the sons of Dhritarashtra.   The five elements:  earth, water, fire, air and either are referred to as places of emergence (cause) and these five are mentioned as “earth-element,” “water-element,” “fire-element,” “air-element” and “space-element.”  All of these elements are always dutifully abiding in the whole of human nature and exists in it inextricably.  Sadhakas can become aware of this through the practice of Guru-instructed Kriya.  If one is able to be aware of this, then no other instruments or mechanisms are necessary to help one know things.  Without being aware of this, astrological work cannot be carried out correctly.  There is a saying by Mahadeva about this subject:  astrology without awareness of svara - meaning the five elements along with the substance of breath - is like a house without a lord, a speaker without wisdom and a body without nerves, and it fails.  As in - svarahinohadha daivajno nathadinam yatha griham shastrahino yatha vakta shirohinancha yadvapuh Through the experience of these elements, past, future, present - all can be known exactly.  With this no other astrological treatises are necessary.  This is why the great sages of Vedic times ascertained that it was impossible to attain wisdom through books.  Cultivating the Practice of Brahman by the sadhana of Sadguru-given Kriya, they attained the all-containing Knowledge of Brahman and acquiring omniscience, they had this Infinite Universe as if in the palms of their hands.  Therefore nothing remained unknown to them.  Because of the emergence and the disappearance of the above-mentioned five elements, the arising of the many different substances with different qualities establishing themselves in the subtle body (electric body) and working in the physical body (material body) as the perceptional and experiential powers of mind along with physical matter, many types of things happen in relation to us in greater or lesser ways.  I will give a description below about how the above-mentioned elements are experienced. During the emergence of the earth element, without touching either side of the nose, breath flows exactly through the middle in 12 finger-lengths.  A honey-liquid is experienced in the throat, giving birth to an addiction to the honey-liquid.  The feeling of yellow forms rises in the mind and a desire to see yellow forms is born.  A four-sided yellow form appears in the Kutastha.  In a pure state, human nature remains in this condition for 50 pala, meaning 20 minutes. During the emergence of the water element, breath flows through the lower part of the nose in 16 finger-lengths.  An astringent-liquid is experienced in the throat giving birth to an addiction to the astringent-liquid.  The feeling of white forms arises in the mind and a desire to see white forms is born.  A white half-moon form appears in the Kutastha.  In a pure state, human nature stays in this condition for 40 pala, meaning 16 minutes. During the emergence of the fire element, breath flows through the upper part of the nose in 4 finger-lengths.  A bitter-liquid is experienced in the throat, giving birth to an addiction to the bitter-liquid.  The feeling of red forms arises in the mind and a desire to see red forms is born.  A red triangle appears in the Kutastha.  In a pure state, human nature remains in this condition for 30 pala, meaning 12 minutes. At the time of the air element, breath flows through the side of the nose in 8 finger-lengths.  A tart-liquid is experienced in the throat giving birth to an addiction to the tart-liquid.  The feeling of blue forms arises in the mind and a desire to see blue forms is born.  A blue circular form appears in the Kutastha.  In a pure state, human nature remains in this condition for 20 pala, meaning for 8 minutes. At the time of the space element, breath flows through the nose without any force/pressure.  A pungent-liquid is experienced in the throat giving birth to an addiction to the pungent-liquid.  The feeling of dark purple forms arises in the mind and a desire to see dark purple forms is born.  In the dark purple of the Kutastha, many kinds of forms appear like points.  In a pure state, human nature remains in this condition for 10 pala, or 4 minutes. One equally sees the above-mentioned elements, the divine consciousness presiding in the main nadis, and the Kutasthachaitanya all as eternal substances, meaning not created by the world and not destroyed even at the time of total dissolution. - 12-