### Prose 
 --- 
परित्राणाय साधूनां विनाशाय च दुष्कृताम् |
धर्मसंस्थापनार्थाय सम्भवामि युगे युगे || 8||
paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśhāya cha duṣhkṛitām
dharma-sansthāpanārthāya sambhavāmi yuge yuge

### Transliteration 
 --- 
paritranaya sadhunam vinashaya cha dushkritam dharmasamsthapanarthaya sambhavami yuge yuge - 8-

### Translation 
 --- 
I save the persons of dharma Evil people are the cause of everyone’s demise And to establish universal [sanatan] dharma I take birth age [yuga] after age - 8-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: To comprehend this sloka, it is important to first understand the meaning of the word “yuga” and find out the reason for its repeated use.  Thus, I will explain the matter below. One meaning of yuga is time divided in four parts, as in - Satya Yuga, Treta Yuga, Dvapara Yuga and Kali Yuga.  These divisions of yugas have been so named because of the condition of dharma at the time; meaning that when all four parts of dharma - complete - manifiest, the age is named Satya; when only three parts manifest, it is Treta; when two, it is Dvapara and when only one part of dharma manifests, the yuga is called Kali.  In the previous sloka it has been extensively addressed that only the Eternal Brahman-Consciousness is sustaining this vast solar system and this Universe, and the realization of this Satchitananda-filled Brahman-Consciousness is the only dharma.  That Eternal Consciousness can be perceived in this creation in three forms:  one form being the tama-ruled physical cosmos; another form is the raja-ruled subtle state of molecules as the holder of the physical world, and the third form is the atomic level as the creator of the world and the cause of emergence and dissolution. Conditions always change in creation; no condition is permanent.  When creation transforms from Eternal Consciousness into physical matter, in order to again return progressively on the path of Consciousness, it continuously transmutes all forms of life, mind etc. from their present states.  For this reason, the saintly scriptural scholars have said that the tama-ruled physical part is the destroyer/transformer; the raja-ruled subtle part is the cause of the accomplishment of the creation of the physical part, and thus has been called the creator, and the sattva-ruled causal part has been called the holder/sustainer.  These forms of the lords of creation, sustenance and destruction have been named in Tantra as Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshvara [respectively].  Consciousness is the only One who is present in all three as named in creation; therefore, these three are just that One Brahman-Consciousness. Perceiving these three parts in the Consciousness-prevailing creation, the saintly philosophical scholars have said that the fourth part, being beyond name, form, the hierarchal structure of the three conditions [previously mentioned in this and the previous paragraph] and creation itself, is still presiding inseparably and behind everything in the manifested world.  They have called that “Turiya Brahman-Consciousness.” At the time when the jiva in any planet or satellite perceives only the first part of consciousness - the physical world, that time for that planet or satellite is called “Kali Yuga.”   When, by the evolution of the jiva’s experiential powers, the jiva can perceive the second part of Consciousness - the subtle world, which is the creator of the physical world, that time is called “Dvapara Yuga.”  At the time when the jiva’s purification allows the perception of the third part of Consciousness - the causal form, which is sustaining and holding creation, that time is called “Treta Yuga.”  And the time when the jiva is completely purified and awakened in Truth, and thus perceives the Satchitananda-filled Turiya Brahman-Consciousness, that time is called “Satya Yuga.”  The saintly scriptural scholars have also called the same progressive states in this miniature Universe of the human body as such, meaning:  experiencing one part of Eternal Consciousness is the state of being called Kali Yuga [kali yugavastha], experiencing two parts constitute the state of being called Dvapara Yuga [dvapara yugavastha], experiencing three parts comprise the state of being called Treta Yuga [treta yugavastha], and the realization of the complete four parts of the Satchitananda-filled Turiya Brahman-Consciousness is the state of being called Satya Yuga [satya yugavastha]. Because of perpetually transforming into different forms, in accordance with physical law, the previous forms of all matter in this body gradually decay.  And by sweat, respiration, urination etc., the waste from such decay are expelled from the body.  One has to eat every day in order to compensate for this erosion.  Food is assimilated and spread throughout the body by blood, filling the place left by the cleaning out of waste products brought about by decay, and thus the body is sustained.  In this way, old fluids and blood in the body are transformed into new fluids and blood.  The daily gradual decay of the old and replenishing with the new accumulates into changing all of the muscle and fat of a person into all new muscle and fat in the span of a lunar month.  In this way, in one solar year, all of the veins, arteries and nerves, and thereby even the ten senses and five pranas of the subtle body are completely transformed into new creation.  For this reason, one year of this physical world has been said to be one day in the plane of the gods or the body of the subtle world.  In three solar years (which is 39 lunar months, when calculated with the intercalary month, the beginning and end), sperm, marrow etc., and thereby even the mind and intellect and all subtle elements are completely transformed into new creation.  These three years are referred to by some as one “khanda yuga.”  In four of these khanda yugas, meaning in twelve solar years - according to Western physiology, in seven solar years - the entire natural body, including even consciousness and the causal body - all three bodies, are completely changed and the human being takes a completely new natural form.  In this way, in 12 years, all parts of a human being are transformed, and with new nature, intellect, mind, prana, senses etc., a new human body and being are created. The jiva eats many kinds of food, but not all of them are appropriate for the maintenance of the body.  Because of cultural habits and the norms of the company one keeps, affinity for certain things and repulsion toward certain things arise in the subtle body.  Thus, the subtle body maintains the body by eating the foods with which it has affinity, and unknowingly leaves out food which it dislikes.  In this way, according to its habits and desires due to samskaras, the body gradually changes into a completely new thing in 12 years.  For this reason, although meat and milk are both excellently nourishing foods, neither the meat-eating person relying on milk, nor the milk-consuming person relying on meat can properly maintain the health of their respective bodies.  According to the jiva’s nature and samskara-based desires, it maintains its body with either with “high quality” foods, meaning that which aids in the revelation of Consciousness, or “low quality” foods, meaning that which is bound to the material world and keeps one in ignorance.  This means that when sense-desires are predominant, one will consume foods that are appropriate for that, and when the desire for the realization of Consciousness is predominant, the jiva will take consciousness-based foods and maintain its body in that way.  Thus, according to either the improvement or decline of habits and samskara-based desires of the jiva, in the previously mentioned 12 years, either a completely new god-nature or animal-nature prevails in the body, by which, one is transformed into the form of a new jiva.  For this reason, the saintly scriptural scholars have called these 12 years as one yuga. It is in written in the Vedanta as well as explained in the commentary on sloka 70 of the third chapter of this book that when the jiva’s capacity of awareness evolves, and by which when it is able to realize the vital force within the material body and then the mind within that, eventually evolving to possess the ability to operate intellectually, it assumes a human form.  In this way, up to the time of acquiring the human body, there is no possibility of the progress of the jiva to go awry in any way, because without having the ability to function intellectually, there is no type of desire that the jiva wants to fulfill; therefore, Consciousness reveals Itself consistently, and the jiva attains a more evolved state of existence according to natural law.  But what a terrible condition befalls the jiva when it becomes aware of the jnanamaya cover!  The acquisition of freedom in the power of desire causes the jiva to become involved in habitual indiscretions, and not to speak of natural evolution, from time to time, being bound to one’s own engagements by that power of desire, the jiva falls and again reincarnates in the form of insects and such.  If the human being does not use the intellect, or if one does not possess that power, then step by step, in 12,000 years the full four-fold realization of Consciousness will manifest and thereby the jiva can possess a new body of complete bliss.  This subject of evolution in time of the material world along with the creation of maya to the presiding of only the Kaivalya of Brahman-Consciousness is written in the Manu Samhita.  As in – pitryeratrahanimasah pravibhagastupakshayoh karmacheshta svahah krishnah shuklah svapnaya sharvari daive ratra hani varham pravibhagastayoh punah ahastatrodagayanam ratrih syaddakshinayanam chatvaryahuh sahasrani varshanantu kritam yugam tasya tavacchati sandhya sandhyamshashcha tathavidhah itareshu sasandheshu sa sandhyamsheshu cha trishu ekapayena vartante sahasrini shatani cha yadetat parisamkhyatamadadeva chaturyugam etaddvadashasahasram devanam yugamuchyate daivikanam yuganantu sahasram parisamkhyaya brahmamekamaharjneyam tavati ratrireva cha One lunar month is one “aho ratri” of the plane of the father, meaning this physical body given by the father.  Within that, the dark fortnight is the day, meaning that this physical body is awake and active, and the bright fortnight is night, meaning that only that which is necessary to function does so in a way that is like sleep.  This matter can be clearly understood by observing the work of honey-bees.  They have no intellectual capacity; they accomplish everything bound to natural law.  They rest during the bright fortnight and once the full moon has passed, they return to work.  And they work tremendously throughout the dark fortnight.  Once the new moon passes, they return to their abodes for rest.  And they only maintain the minimal functioning of their lives - only eating and such - throughout the bright fortnight. In this way, 12 orbits around the sun, meaning one solar year is one aho ratri in the plane of the gods, meaning the body of providence or the subtle body.  Within that, the summer solstice marks the day of the subtle body, meaning the time of awakened activity, and the winter solstice marks the night, meaning the state of sleep and the time of rest, when only minimal functioning is maintained. Kulukabhatta, the primary interpreter of the Manu Samhita, has explained the word “varsha” [year] as “daiva varsha” [year of the subtle body], but one can see no reason for this.  There is no mention of “daiva varsha” anywhere in this, instead it seems to clearly indicate the physical year.  Therefore, I will explain the meaning of this sloka as would be naturally understood. 4,000 solar years make one Satya Yuga.  Its dawn, meaning the transitional period of its beginning is 400 years, and its dusk, meaning the transitional period of its end is 400 years.  In this way, 4,800 years comprise one Satya Yuga.  The Treta Yuga and the others and their dawns and dusks are comprised of the number of years calculated by progressively subtracting one from the digit in the “thousands” and “hundreds” place, respectively, as delineated to the Satya Yuga and its transitional periods.  This means that Treta Yuga is 3,000 years in duration and its dawn is 300 years long, as well as its dusk also being 300 years in length.  Dvapara Yuga has 2,000 years, its dawn being 200 years and its dusk at 200 years in length.  Kali Yuga consists of 1,000 years and its dawn is 100 years and its dusk is 100 years.  Thus, along with the transitional periods, one complete Treta Yuga is 3,600 years long; the time of Dvapara Yuga is 2,400 years; and the time of Kali Yuga is 1,200 years.  The above-mentioned 12,000 years comprising the four yugas make one yuga for the gods, meaning the body of providence or the subtle body, meaning that one part, two parts, three parts and eventually all four parts of Consciousness are gradually realized and the entire subtle body dissolves mind, intellect etc. and resides in a blissful state.  In this way, one thousand maha yugas in the time of the subtle body, meaning 12,000,000 years - by progressive elevation, even the causal body and maya are dissolved and the Kaivalya-form, or only the Pure Brahman-Consciousness Form is existent.  These 12,000,000 years of evolutionary time together are called one “day of Brahma.”  Having attained the state of Kaivalya and at the same time being devoid of Maya, the time of complete rest naturally occurs, and as no action is performed to maintain the Self, gradually maya manifests, and in 12,000,000 years again the material existence becomes predominant.  For this reason, these 12,000,000 years together are called one “night of Brahma.”  This is what is known as one “aho ratri” of Brahma, or total dissolution and creation. But what misfortune for the human being and what trickery by God!  Without the help of this knowledge, there is no possibility of realizing the anandamaya covering, and this knowledge is itself the step to bliss [ananda].  So is it the way of things that the human within the jiva is worthless and the capacity to operate intellectually is just some ironic mockery?  That can never be, because the jiva acquires this human body endowed with this high knowledge after traveling through eight million four hundred thousand yonis.  It is only the misuse of this high knowledge with selfish desires that causes the jiva to be bound like a silkworm endlessly spinning its own suffering.  If one knows the proper use of this knowledge then one can go beyond this horrific vaishnavi chakra maya, meaning that one can successfully go beyond even the laws of one’s nature.  The progress mentioned above which would take 12,000 years - that complete four-fold realization of Consciousness, the revelation of the anandamaya kosha and Kaivalya or Full God-ness,, pervading the Universe, can be attained in a short time through sadhana.  This subject has been extensively explained in the sloka 70 of the third chapter of this book. Now the significance of the mentioning of the word “yuga” twice shall be explained.  One mentioning of “yuga” is to explain at what kind of time or in what kind of condition this Brahman-Consciousness is fully manifest.  The reason for the other mentioning of “yuga” is to explain what kind of work leads to the emergence of that Consciousness.  About the first - as to the matter of the condition in which Consciousness manifests - it has been commented upon as thoroughly as possible.  For the moment, the second significance, meaning - what kind of method can the jiva use by which it can go beyond the vaishanavi chakra maya and thereby attain Consciousness-manifesting Full Brahman-ness in a short time, is being explained below. Besides the above-mentioned definition of “yuga,” there is another meaning.  In that, “yuga” refers to “yugma,” meaning - pair (yugmantu yugalam yugam ityamarah).  Now, one needs to see the meaning of “yugakriya” as “yugmakriya” or paired kriya.  This is what the Supreme Vishnu-seeing vaishanavas have called the practice of “yugal [paired] mantra.”  “Mana trayate ity mantra” - that by which the mind is liberated from maya is called “mantra.”  This subject has been written about in the introduction  of this book.  This type of meaning for the word “mantra” is also written in Tantra.  As in – brahmadi krimi paryantam praninam pranavartanam nishvasashvasarupena mantrohayam vartate priye At the Divine Goddess’ question, Lord Shiva says, “Beloved!  The in-breath and out-breath, which together hold the life of all living things of Brahman, even that of a worm, are called ‘mantra’.” Now it can be clearly understood that this pairing of in-breath and out-breath is the “yugal [paired] mantra.”  No one can live in this world by only taking the in-breath or only expelling the out-breath.  This Universe is manifesting bound to this yugal mantra.  Its absence causes the world-Brahmanda to disappear.  Therefore, the way to dissolve this world-Brahmanda in the mind, and even further, to merge the mind and intellect into the Self, meaning Atman, is the awakening through the practice of this yugal mantra in the form of the in-breath and the out-breath.  This subject is written about in every book of the vaishnavas.  It is because of the need to be aware of this mantra that the jiva again and again travels through birth after birth in one body after another, leaving behind the conditions of ignorance and fulfilling the total force of the acquired samskaras (resultant force), and eventually becomes aware of mantra.  Awakening this mantra in a certain way, by practicing according to the instructions of Sadguru, and establishing it in stillness, the entire Universe, including mind and intellect, dissolves and the Pure, Complete Consciousness-state is realized.  The saintly scholars of yogic scriptures call this practice the “kriya of pranayam.”  It is also written in the Patanjal Yoga Sutras that - the stilling of the movement of this yugal mantra of in-breath and out-breath, meaning the stilling of restlessness, is callled “pranayam.”  As in - shvasaprashvasayorgati vicchedah pranayamah -   Sadhanapada - no. 49 In this way, ending the restlessness of mantra and establishing pranayam causes all mechanisms of the body to be united with Consciousness, and when that happens, the jiva can leave the functioning of the body to those limbs and organs on their own, and the jiva as the Self can exist separate from the body.  This type of existence is what is called the “jivanmukta” state [liberated while having a body].  Teaching his disciple King Janaka about the matter of this liberation, Maharshi Ashtavakra said the same thing.  As in - na prithvi na jalam nagni na vayu dourna va bhavan esham shakshinamatmanam chidrupam viddhi muktaye yadi deham prithakakritya chiti vishramya tishthami adhunaiva sukhi shanta bandhomukta bhavishyashi -   Ashtavakra Samhita - 1 pra/ 3/4 “You are not made of earth, water, fire, air, ether - any such elemental matter.  If you desire liberation, then become aware of the Witness of all of these elements, meaning the One in whose vision all work and the appearance and disappearance of these elements are happening, that Consciousness - Atman - the Self.  If you can know the Self in this way and, being unattached to these quintelemental physical phenomena, if you can reside separately from the body in the Atman as Consciousness, meaning resting self in the Self, then, filled with Tranquility and Supreme Contentment, you will instantly be liberated from the bindings of samsara.” Now, I will explain below about the practice of yugal mantra, meaning the kriya [technology] of pranayam and how, by such, it is possible to go beyond the vaishnavi chakra maya, meaning - how to do the work that will in a short time actualize the four-fold, complete awareness of Consciousness that is realized in the normal course in the span of 12,000 years, meaning also - how to realize the Kaivalya, or Consciousness-alone, state which in the usual course of time takes 12,000,000 years. Because of the special quality of power in 12 places of the orbit around the sun, those places and the stars corresponding to it have been designated as the 12 signs of the zodiac by astrological scholars, and they ascribed the qualities of certain earthly creatures and other things to those signs and called them the sign of the ram [Aries], the sign of the bull [Taurus] etc. In that cycle of the zodiac, the moon, beginning on the first day of the bright fortnight, travels through six signs of the zodiac until the full moon, when the moon is at its furthest point away from the sun. And again, beginning on the first day of the dark fortnight, it goes through the other six signs until the new moon, when the moon is at its closest point near the sun. This moving away to the furthest point and moving back to the closest point to the sun, having gone through all 12 signs of the zodiac, is called one lunar month. In this way, the movement of 12 signs of the zodiac with the sun, beginning with one and ending back at that same one, constitutes one solar year. In one solar year, some of the 12th lunar month is left over, because of which, in three years, an extra lunar month is born. The ephemeris scholars call this the intercalary month. Thus, 37 lunar months comprise three solar years. It is written in astrological treatises that if the sun is beneficent at the time of one’s birth, meaning if the human being who is born into the body is carrying the good parts of the solar materials, then that being will be of great nobleness and wisdom. If the sun is maleficent during the time of one’s birth, meaning if the human being who is born into the body is carrying the bad parts of the solar materials, then that being will be tremendously egotistical and devoid of responsible behavior. In this way, observing the relationship of the good parts of solar materials to knowledge, or consciousness, and seeing that completely the same exact connection and results are true pertaining to yogakriya and the emerging sun within the body by it as to the realization of Knowledge, or Consciousness, along with much other evidence, the saintly yogic scholars have stated that the sun arising by Kriya within the miniature Universe of the body is a part of the sun in the cosmos and they have called it the human consciousness. In the same way, if the moon is beneficent at the time of one’s birth, meaning if the human being born into the body is carrying the good parts of the lunar materials, then that being has a calm and steady nature, and he or she is of a happy mind, pleasant to people, and passes life always in the company of good persons. If the moon is maleficent at the time of one’s birth, then that person is of a restless nature and is always unsatisfied, a nuisance to people, and he or she passes life in the company of bad persons. Thus, observing the relationship of the good parts of the lunar materials to the state of mind and its exact representation in the relationship of the moon in the body, emerging from yogakriya, to the state of mind - meaning the restlessness of the moon is the restlessness of the mind, and the stillness of the moon is the stillness of the mind and much other evidence - the saintly yogic scholars have stated that this moon in the miniature Brahmanda of this body revealed through yogakriya is a part of the external moon of the cosmos and they have called this the human mind. Observing the sushumna as the path of consciousness, and six special locations of power within the sushumna manifesting the radiance of consciousness all around those spots as lotus-like petals - from which consciousness spreads and presides as different gods in the sixty thousand nadis fulfilling every task in the body - the saintly yogic scholars have termed the likenesses of those special places in the sushumna as four-petaled, six-petaled, ten-petaled, twelve-petaled, sixteen-petaled and two-petaled lotuses; and they have understood that the sushumna is the path of the orbit of the jiva-consciousness sun and the lotuses are the points of the zodiac. The Supreme Yogi Lord Shiva and other great beings have taught that, according to Sadguru’s instructions, uniting the moon-like sattvic mind to the totality of rajoguna manifesting in the prana vayu [prana airs] and working this united form within the sushumna, traveling the six lotuses from the two-petaled to the Muladhar, the furthest point from the Sun - the jiva-Consciousness revealed in the Sahasrara - and again traveling through the six lotuses from the Muladhar to the two-petaled lotus - the nearest point to the Sun revealed as Consciousness - one month’s work [evolution] is accomplished. This means that within this short time all blood and flesh in the body is purified of material coagulation; thus, related addictions are also purified and the body begins to be prepared for the Holy Consciousness-substance. In this way, shooting the prana united with mind to the Muladhar and again drawing it from there is called one “kriya of pranayam” in yogic scriptures. By this, samskaras are removed from consciousness and happiness is maintained. In the Patanjal Yoga Sutras it is also written that joy at the time of pleasure for the jiva, compassion at the time of sorrow, satisfaction at doing good work and rejection of wrong work bring cheerfulness of mind. But that is external and remains only for a while, because the mind, within a short time, being a slave to the previous samskaras, becomes unhappy again. Therefore, in order to have happiness for a long time, one should cheer up one’s inner being by the samskara-purifying Kriya. By the Kriya of throwing, meaning shooting of the prana vayu downward and again drawing it, or yugal mantra, the samskaras are removed and this happiness remains for a long time. As in - maitrakarunamuditopekshanam sukhaduhkha punyapunyavishayanam bhavanashchittaprasadanam - no. 33 pracchardanavidharanyabhyam va pranasya - no. 34 - Samadhipada Practicing yugal mantra, or the kriya of pranayam at one sitting, including its dawn and dusk, 12 times, meaning 14 times, accomplishes the work of one solar year. This means that the material coagulation concerning arteries, veins and nerves, and thereby also the material coagulation of the body of providence or the subtle body and its ten senses and five pranas are cleared. Thus, their addictions are also purified and the body is prepared to receive the Holy Consciousness-substance. This is called “jada shuddhi.” With its dawn and dusk, doing this Kriya 37 times, meaning 39 times [at one sitting] accomplishes the work of three solar years, meaning the work of one “khanda yuga.” Thus, the material coagulation in sperm, marrow, all physical elements and thereby the material coagulation in mind and intellect are also purified, and the body is further prepared for the realization of the Holy Consciousness-substance. This is called “khanda shuddhi” or “nadi shuddhi.” And doing this Kriya, with its dawn and dusk, 148 times, meaning 150 times, accomplishes the work of 12 solar years. This means that the material coagulation of even the consciousness-nature, or the causal body, is cleared. Thus, purified of all addictions, the body begins to realize the longed-for, highest Holy Consciousness-substance. This is referred to as “bhuta shuddhi” in all Tantric scriptures. By this, the work of the twenty-four elements is fulfilled in a short time and it becomes possible to reside in bliss even while in this elemental body. Performing bhuta shuddhi just once this way brings complete happiness to the mind and that happiness remains for a long time. If there are no changes in the normal course, then, within a short time, no kind of unhappiness can come to the mind. It has been discovered in the scientific world that if electrical waves travel around all sides of an object, then that object becomes imbued with the qualities of attraction and repulsion and is transformed into the form of a magnet, and that the electrical waves do not enter the object; instead, they remain floating above it. The work of the telegraph is carried out by this method. One can observe by an electrometer that when an electrical conductor is heated from one side, from the other side, an electrical flow occurs and moves in the direction of the heated side. The earth is a massive electrical conductor. Whichever side the sun is on is heated. Therefore, from the other side of the earth an electrical flow moves towards the heated side. And because the earth is rotating towards the east, that heated section is continuously going west. Therefore that electrical flow is also encircling the earth in a westward direction. In this way, because electricity is perpetually spinning around the globular earth, the earth is imbued with the qualities of attraction and repulsion and is existing as a giant, highly powerful magnet. For this reason, the magnetic needle of a compass is always attracted towards the north and south. This electrical flow around the earth does not always travel with the same force. Its intensity decreases and increases. At midday, when the sun is directly above the head and at midnight, when the sun is directly below - at these times, because of the heated areas of the earth being directly above and directly below, the enjoined electrical fflow cannot have much intensity in the direction of east or west; but, because the earth is perpetually turning eastward and thereby the heated section is always moving westward, the electrical flow around the earth also maintains motion towards the west. At prangnatakal, meaning the time from midnight until midday, when the earth is being heated on the easterly side, there is another flow of electricity in that direction, and thus the above-mentioned perpetual flow of electricity connected with the rotation of the earth towards the west is diminished, and it continues its westward flow with very low intensity. And at the time of pashchannatakal, meaning the time from midday until midnight, the earth is heated in the westerly side and there is an electrical flow in that direction, causing the above-mentioned perpetual electrical flow connected with the rotation of the earth to move westward with double the intensity. Thus, because of an electrical flow perpetually moving westward around the earth and thereby causing the earth to behave like a magnet, the great sages of India forbid lying down with the head pointed towards the north or the west. As in - prakshiro bhavati vidya valamayushcha dakshine pashchime pravala chinta hani mrityumathottare Lying down with the head towards the east brings about knowledge and wisdom; lying with the head to the south increases strength; lying with the head towards the west causes turbulence in thought; and lying with the head towards the north brings death closer. The reason for this is that lying with the head towards the west causes the perpetually westward moving electrical flow to draw all of the impurities of the body to the head, which is the primary place of consciousness, and thereby all of these together cause the consciousness to become impure by which it falls into a stupor of ignorance or unawareness. Because of that, meaningless imaginary things arise in the head and the jiva becomes immersed in turbulent thoughts. But lying with the head pointing east causes the opposite action to happen and the primary place of consciousness - the head - is cleaned of impurities, and wisdom or knowledge is revealed. Similarly, because the section north of the equator is predominant in magnetic attraction flowing towards the north, lying with the head towards the north causes all of the airs to rise to the head depleting one of strength, and thereby, the body gradually becomes weak and problems arise within it, and death comes ever closer. But lying with the head towards the south causes the opposite action to take place, meaning the airs move downward which increases one’s strength, making the body robust and giving it long life. In this way, the decrease and increase of intensity of the electrical flow around the earth during the prangnatakal and pashchannatakal brings about significant change in the enjoined subtle world. And the physical world is also similarly changed significantly according to the changes in the degree of heat during the day and night. Thus, from 66/30 north of the equator to 66/36 south, covering 133 parts in this middle section of the earth, in a span of 24 hours, meaning one aho ratri, the physical part and the subtle part of everything, both go through a change twice - the total being four times. The plane of the gods, meaning the northern part of the world from 23/30 in the north and the plane of the monsters, meaning the southern 23/30 have six months of day and six months of night; the condition of the physical things presiding there do not go through any change within 24 hours; only the subtle bodies of those things go through a change only twice because of the decrease and increase of the intensity of the electrical flow during the prangnatakal and the pashchannatakal; and because there is no increase or decrease in the electrical flow or in the heat inside the earth, no change takes place in any matter present there. Therefore, the best and most pure place to practice this yogakriya is the asana within a cave. The next best place for asana is in the plane of the gods in the northern part. The southern part is filled with water, so the point is moot. And there are very few places that are pure for asana in the middle section on the earth. For this reason, even a little of the kriya practiced in other places has to be done by those residing in the middle section on the earth with great care and much effort in regards to the asana - in a place not too hot, not too cold, not draughty, on a deerskin upon which there should be a cloth with a material that iis a non-conductor etc. Therefore, the particulars of Kriya for the residents of the middle section on the earth, where there are not many pure places for asana, are being explained in a condensed manner. If the residents of earth’s middle section do bhuta shuddhi once at dawn, then they do not need to do any more purifying Kriya during the prangnatakal, meaning the time from when the sun is low in the east until midday, because there is no change in natural states at this time. Therefore, unless one makes oneself impure, no impurities will be born on their own. Because of the above-mentioned reason, if one does bhuta shuddhi at midday, then there is no need to do any purifying Kriya until dusk. In this way, if one does bhuta shuddhi once at dusk, then there is no need to do any purifying Kriya until midnight, meaning the time when the sun is low in the west. And if one does bhuta shuddhi once at midnight, then there is no need to do any type of purifying Kriya until dawn. Unless one makes oneself impure, there is no possibility of any kind of impurity arising on its own at this time. Thus, the yogis of the earth’s middle section have to do bhuta shuddhi four times a day. But for householders, the prescript is for Kriya at dawn, midday and dusk only. Kriya at midnight is not as imperative. The reason for this is that householders have to labor at many different kinds of work during the day and need more rest at night. Otherwise, it is possible that the body will become weak, giving rise to disease and making the mind depressed. And if at the time of complete rest one can have sound sleep, then no natural change can touch their minds. But, if there is not that much labor, or if the consciousness is at peace causing very little depletion from the body, and thus if it is not necessary to get as much rest, or if one for some reason is remains awake at night, then Kriya at midnight is also very necessary. Thus, if the householder life requires a good amount of labor and rest, one should perform bhuta shuddhi Kriya at the three transitional periods of dawn, midday and dusk every day. In this way, doing Kriya at the three transitional periods regularly every day, in a little more than a lunar month - in 34 days - and even if Kriya is not done one or two times because of important occasions or some events in householder life then in 36 days, one completes 100 bhuta shuddhi Kriyas. It has already been shown that the amount of evolution in the realization of Consciousness that would take 12 physical years can be accomplished by one bhuta shuddhi Kriya. Therefore, completing 100 [bhuta shuddhi] Kriyas in 36 days accomplishes the work of one Kali Yuga’s length of 1,200 years. Then the Dvapara yugavastha is attained and one can perceive the existence of the subtle body, the second aspect of Consciousness. In this way, the work of four yugas of Consciousness-realization that would normally take 12,000 years are accomplished by sadhakas in 360 days or one solar year, by which all four aspects of the beyond-creation Brahman-Consciousness is fully realized. Later, according to Sadguru’s instructions, by Omkar Kriya etc. one can realize the different luminous levels of Consciousness in 3 years or 39 lunar months, and thereafter accomplish the work of 12,000,000 years or one kalpa in 12 years, attaining Kaivalya, or seeing the Self as pervading all things of the Cosmos, and thus realizing Brahman. The saints have said that if sadhakas do not go astray in a wrong direction, even progressing in Kriya slowly can bring the attainment of Kaivalya or Brahman in 36 years, or 39 years if some occasions or events of householder life hinder progress. But diligent sadhakas can also complete this work and attain Kaivalya or Brahman at a high speed of even less than 12 years. Once sadhakas attain this all-pervading, all-powerful, all-knowing state, they have nothing in the Cosmos that they lack or that they want. If in this state one remains without doing Kriya, then ignorance and delusion gradually emerge again and cover up the revelation of Consciousness. This has been stated in the 24th sloka of the third chapter of this Srimad Bhagavad Gita. Therefore, even after the attainment of this Kaivalyavastha or Brahman, in order to preserve oneself, one must perform Kriya regularly. Now, if one can understand that one meaning of the word “yuga” is the condition of Satya, Treta etc., and that the other definition of the word is the way of attaining those conditions via yugal mantra, and if one can understand that it is for the reason of instructing in the two meanings that this word “yuga” is mentioned twice in this sloka, then it does not take long to understand the actual meaning of this sloka. Then the meaning becomes thus: destroying the evil tendencies in sadhakas, in order to establish dharma, meaning the revelation of Consciousness, by the practice of yugal mantra, meaning pranayam, by which, upon gradual attainment of the states of Satya, Treta etc., the Brahman-Consciousness fully reveals Itself. - 8-