### Prose 
 --- 
सततं कीर्तयन्तो मां यतन्तश्च दृढव्रता: |
नमस्यन्तश्च मां भक्त्या नित्ययुक्ता उपासते || 14||
satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaśh cha dṛiḍha-vratāḥ
namasyantaśh cha māṁ bhaktyā nitya-yuktā upāsate

ज्ञानयज्ञेन चाप्यन्ये यजन्तो मामुपासते |
एकत्वेन पृथक्त्वेन बहुधा विश्वतोमुखम् || 15||
jñāna-yajñena chāpyanye yajanto mām upāsate
ekatvena pṛithaktvena bahudhā viśhvato-mukham

### Transliteration 
 --- 
satatam kirtayanto mam yatantashcha dhriravratah namasyantashcha mam bhaktya nityayukta upasate - 14- jnanayajnena chapyanye yajanto mamupasate ekatvena prithaktvena bahudha vishwatomukham - 15-

### Translation 
 --- 
Some worship Me through chanting Some worship Me with many rites To know Me they take steadfast care They devote themselves and prostrate themselves - 14- Knowing the Universal Form of Vasudeva Thinking as separate or thinking as one In this way, many devotees worship Some in sensory ways, some with service - 15-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: In these two slokas, the practice of “upasana” [commonly: worship], as has been understood by great knowledgeable saints, towards that Infinite Consciousness has been written about .. Therefore, what “upasana” is, who is decreed to be worshipped, and what is even the need for it - these matters should be addressed first. “Upasana” - this word is comprised of “up” and “aas.” “Up” means “nearness” and “aas” is used to mean “establishing.” Thus, the meaning of the word “upasana” can be understood to be: “being near.” Now, who should be worshipped and for what reason or its necessity etc. is being gradually explained. The only necessity for the jiva, meaning the being, is the cessation of all types of sorrows from the adhibhautic [physical], adhidaivic [subtle] and adhyatmic [causal] essences. For this reason, the extinguishing of this threefold sorrow is what has been called in Samkhyadarshan as the purpose, or necessity, of the being. As in - trividhaduhkhanivrittirartha purushanam - 1:1 To negate adhibhautic sorrow, the jiva again and again partakes in the usage of cuisine, haberdashery etc.; to end adhidaivic sorrow, it partakes again and again in the desirable things of sound, touch, sight, taste, smell etc.; and to stop adhyatmic sorrow, the jiva again and again engages in activities such as being in the company of the opposite sex. Because all these sorrows are temporarily ended by partaking in these desired things, these enjoyments are thought to be accomplishments necessary for the being’s life-purpose. But the wise have said that no type of sorrow born of desire is permanently extinguished through the partaking of things of desire; whatever [cessation] happens stays only momentarily; immediately afterwards, like the ghee oblation in fire, the sufferings burst afire again, this time with twice the force. As in - “na jatu kamah kamanamupabhogena shamyati havisha krishnavartmaiva bhuya evabhivardhate” If the jiva knew that by the partaking of these things of desire the force of the triumvirate of sorrows would increase twofold, then it would never be engaged in that. The jiva does not want this kind of way of being. The type of negation of the triumvirate of sorrows that it wants is such that they can never appear again. The jiva prays for the supreme substance of cessation, meaning the Supreme Nirvana. In Samkhyadarshan it has also been stated that the total ending of these three sorrows is the most important goal of the being or jiva. This supreme purpose of the being is the jiva’s prayer. As in - tribidhaduhkhatyantanivritti paramapurusharthah - 1:2 In all types of philosophical scriptures, this has been concluded with certainty: that if one dies, then one must take birth, and if one takes birth, one will surely die. Therefore, the jiva, bound in this creation-samsara, cannot attain the Supreme Nirvana or the highest purpose of being while being enslaved by birth and death. To attain this, it is necessary to liberated from life and death. As in Samkhyadarshan - na drishta drishtattat siddhih nivrittehpanurattidarshanat - 1:3 utkaryadapi mokshasya sarotkarshah shrute - 1:5 It has also been concluded by all types philosophical scriptures that: if the jiva cannot abide in Kaivalyapada by not establishing himself in that Infinite Consciousness beyond creation, then he cannot ever attain that supreme purpose - meaning the complete cessation of all types of adhibhautic, adhidaivic and adhyatmic sorrows - that Supreme Nirvana. Therefore, to accomplish this highest purpose, it is extremely necessary to do upasana of Consciouness - meaning being near to Spirit. The eminent sages have decreed this upasana of Consciousness as the only process to attain the highest purpose. Maharshi Vedavyas, in the 35th sloka - pertaining to karmayoga - of the third chapter of this book, has also said this: that it is good to die during doing upasana of Consciousness; one should not do upasana to anything else; that is extremely dangerous. It is by taking up the paths of devotion [bhakti] and wisdom/knowledge [jnana] that one can practice upasana of Atman-Consciousness. In these two slokas, Maharshi Vedavyas has taught us in one sloka the practice of upasana by the way of devotion, and in the other, the way of wisdom/knowledge. The sadhakas on the path of bhakti, after having become devoid of restlessness, having become steadfast, with one-pointed devotion and heart completely engrossed, and always being engaged in the discussion of Spirit, stop being externalized and turn towards Atman, and thus always abide in that Consciousness-Self. - 14- The sadhakas on the path of jnana, take their personal realizations - greater or lesser - revealed by yogic methods, where some experience the existence of Atman-Consciousness as separately residing in all the created things in the forms of Brahma, Rudra etc., some experience the existence of the only worshippable thing as Infinite Consciousness and oneself as the worshipper, and some experience even oneself to be a part of that All-pervading Consciousness, and thereby knowing all things of creation to be unsubstantial and experiencing that only Atman-Consciousness exists, do upasana to that Infinite Consciousness. - 15-