### Prose 
 --- 
शुचौ देशे प्रतिष्ठाप्य स्थिरमासनमात्मन: |
नात्युच्छ्रितं नातिनीचं चैलाजिनकुशोत्तरम् || 11||
śhuchau deśhe pratiṣhṭhāpya sthiram āsanam ātmanaḥ
nātyuchchhritaṁ nāti-nīchaṁ chailājina-kuśhottaram

तत्रैकाग्रं मन: कृत्वा यतचित्तेन्द्रियक्रिय: |
उपविश्यासने युञ्ज्याद्योगमात्मविशुद्धये || 12||
tatraikāgraṁ manaḥ kṛitvā yata-chittendriya-kriyaḥ
upaviśhyāsane yuñjyād yogam ātma-viśhuddhaye

समं कायशिरोग्रीवं धारयन्नचलं स्थिर: |
सम्प्रेक्ष्य नासिकाग्रं स्वं दिशश्चानवलोकयन् || 13||
samaṁ kāya-śhiro-grīvaṁ dhārayann achalaṁ sthiraḥ
samprekṣhya nāsikāgraṁ svaṁ diśhaśh chānavalokayan

प्रशान्तात्मा विगतभीर्ब्रह्मचारिव्रते स्थित: |
मन: संयम्य मच्चित्तो युक्त आसीत मत्पर: || 14||
praśhāntātmā vigata-bhīr brahmachāri-vrate sthitaḥ
manaḥ sanyamya mach-chitto yukta āsīta mat-paraḥ

### Transliteration 
 --- 
shuchau deshe pratishthapya sthirasanamatmanah natyucchritam natinicham chelajinakushottaram - 11- tatraikagram manh kritva yatachittendriyakriyah upavishyasane yunjad yogamatmavishuddaye - 12- samam kayashirogrivam dharyannachalam sthirah samprekshya nasikagram svam dishashchanavalokayan - 13- prashantatma vigatavibrahmacharivrate sthitah manah samyamya macchitto yukto asita matparah - 14-

### Translation 
 --- 
Solitary; take your body Sit in a purified place Under skin, spread a seat of kusha grass On top of that spread a soft piece of material Keep mind and senses one-pointed Sitting in asana you will later know Atman Body, neck, head and such - do not move anything Focus your sight at the root of the nose; do not look in any direction Be in profound peace and in a chaste way Both mind and consciousness in Me - 11, 12, 13 and 14-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: What are the aspects of Kriya yoga in these four slokas?  How does one practice them, and in what ways can one be careful about the obstacles associated with these?  These have been subtly indicated here.  Thus:  what is known is yoga; what are known as its aspects; and which are its obstacles as well as how can one save oneself from those obstacles - understanding all of these makes it easier to clearly comprehend these slokas.  For that reason, before explaining these sllokas, I present below in a condensed manner what is written about those subjects in the supremely high yogic treatise, Patanjal Yogasutra, as well as in other primary and important scriptures. Shiksha, Kalpa, Vyakarana, Nirukta, Cchanda, Jyotish - having studied these six Vedic aspects and thereby having become prepared to recite the Vedas, when one analyzes the profound statements made in them such as “tattvamasi,” “sohham,” “ekamevadvitiyam,” “sarvakhalvidam brahman” etc., one comes to know that, just as the one water element in the creation, meaning liquid substances, by being mixed with complementary qualities mutate and appear as oil and many such types of substances, in the same way, only the one Brahman-Consciousness, meaning Paramatman, mutates through Maya and appears as this whole creation with its beings that are of the land, of the air, of the water etc. along with streams and rivers, oceans, mountains etc. - as this infinite Universe.  And just the same as when those oil-like substances mix with water, instead of permeating the water remain separate, similarly the Maya-enjoined creation-substances are always in the Infinite Brahman-Consciousness, although mixed with It, they cannot permeate the entire Universe, and thus, discerning themselves to be a tiny part of creation, they remain as separate things in creation.  Just as by applying some appropriate method to medicine such as liquor potass, or other such substance, the compound liquid can be broken up and immediately it will permeate all of the water, similarly, if by some technique, among all things in this infinite Universe, the fluctuations of consciousness is stopped and the influence of Maya is destroyed, then, mixing with this Infinite Consciousness, one pervades the entire Cosmos, becoming omniscient and omnipotent, and attaining Kaivalya or Brahman.  In this way, the cessation of Maya-caused fluctuations of consciousness, meaning ordinary actions, like the union of the oil-like substance with water like liquor potass etc, is for the union of all things in the Universe with that Infinite Consciousness, meaning the reason for yoga, which is why the great scriptural saints call the cessation of the fluctuations in consciousness “yoga” [union], and the techniques/methods that one needs to apply to stop those fluctuations in consciousness are called the “anga” - body, limbs or parts - of yoga.  As in - yogashchittavritti nirodhah -  Samadhipada - no. 2 Although the above-mentioned limbs or parts of yoga to be practiced in order to stop the fluctuations in consciousness are of many types, in the Patanjal philosophical treatises those have been divided into eight parts and given these eight names: yama, niyama, asana, pranayam, pratyahar, dharana, dhyan and samadhi.  Among these, the last - dharana, dhyan and samadhi - having nothing to do with external sadhana, are called internal parts.  As in - yamaniyamasanapranayamapratyaharadharanadhyanasamadhiyohashtavangani -  Sadhanapada - no. 29 Now, I present below the manner in which the above-mentioned parts of yoga are written about in the book named “Yogasutra” by Maharshi Patanjal: ahimsasatyasteyabrahmacharyaparigraha yamah -  Sadhanapada - no. 30 shouchasantoshatapasvadhyayeshvarapranidhanani niyamah -  Sadhanapada - no. 32 sthirasukhamasanam -  Sadhanapada - no. 46 tatah dvandanavaghata -  Sadhanapada - no. 48 svasvavishayasamprayoge chittasya svarupanukara ivendriyanam pratyaharah -  Sadhanapada - no. 54 tasmin sati shvasaprashvasayorgatirvicchedah pranayamah -  Sadhanapada - no. 49 tatah kshiyate prakashavaranam -  Sadhanapada - no. 52 dharanashu yogyata manasah -  Sadhanapada - no. 53 deshabandha chittasya dharana -  Bibhutipada - no. 1 tatrapratyayenaikatanata dhyanam -  Bibhutipada - no. 2 tadevarthamatranirbhasam swarupashunyamivasamadhih -  Bibhutipada - no. 3 trayamekatra samyama -  Bibhutipada - no. 4 ayamantaranga purvebhyah -  Bibhutipada - no. 7 Renouncing envy, greed, taking things of others and such things that cause mental restlessness, being on the path of truth in chastity, and thereby extinguishing the perturbations in consciousness is called “yama.”  By this method, all destructive tendencies are eradicated.  This matter has been explained in the fourth, fifth and sixth slokas of the first chapter of this book. If, after experiencing Consciousness-Self, the human consciousness is unable to attain the Bliss of Atman, then, as the joys of bhoga are now scattered about, it adopts many types of tendencies.  This condition produces physical ailments, “styan” - meaning mental problems, confusion/doubt - meaning the inability to discern between good and bad, inadvertence - meaning the non-caring aloofness of mind and the lack of enthusiasm, laziness - meaning the lack of activity, incessant worry over this or that happening, envisioning imaginary things - meaning delusion, a scenario of not being able to attain - meaning a type of insufferable condition that says “something seems to be obviously available but I can’t seem to get it,” unsettledness - meaning the lack of stability - many types of sufferings such as these become present.  In the book named “Yogasutra” by Maharshi Patanjal, these have been called obstacles, meaning impediments.  It is also written in the aforementioned book that the threefold suffering - meaning the physical suffering caused by the shock or attack from humans or animals or some other physical thing, the suffering of the subtle level caused by the corruption of the subtle body due to lapse in proper discipline, and spiritual suffering associated with the experience of [not fully attaining] the Bliss of Atman - causes depression, meaning despondency associated with unfulfilled desire, “angamejayatva,” meaning the shakiness of body and limb, along with inhalation and exhalation, and by these things the human consciousness remains in a disturbed state.  Thus, to eradicate all of these, one should practice “ektattva” [one unified thing].  As in - byadhistyanasamshayapramadalasyabiratibhrantidarshanalabdhabhumikatvanavasthitatvani chittavikshepastehantarayah -  Samadhipada - no. 30 duhkhadaurmanasyangamejayatvashvasaprashavasa vikshepasahabhuvah -  Samadhipada - no. 31 tatpratishedhartamekatattvamabhyasah -  Samadhipada - no. 32 Now, what is this which is called “ektattva,” and how one can practice it, is being explained.  To speak about this, first it is necessary to speak about the nature of mind, meaning its character.  By nature, the mind cannot just reside in a condition of emptiness without holding on to something, and it loves bliss so much that it does not hold on to anything that does not give it any joy.  If for some reason it has to hold on to such a thing, that is for only a short while.  As quickly as it can, it will abandon it and run after another thing that will be joyful.  Knowing these two characteristics, it can clearly understood that if it is possible to keep the mind happy in something, something from which there can be no fear of unhappiness, then it remains in that thing in bliss, and no longer does it try to go after other things.  As soon as the mind is no longer restlessly going from one thing to another thing, and is steadily holding on to one thing by which it is happily residing, ektattva is being practiced.  For the practice of this ektattva, two slokas about keeping the mind happy and five slokas about keeping the mind steadfast - these seven sutras are written in the Patanjal philosophical treatises.  As in - maitrikarunamuditopekshanam sukhaduhkhapunyapunyavishayanambhavanashchittaprasadanam -  Samadhipada - no. 33 pracchardanavidharanabhyam va pranasya -  Samadhipada - no. 34 The human consciousness of the jiva is happy at merriment in pleasure, pathos in sorrow, enthusiasm for beneficent work, and rejection of maleficent work, but these external joys remain only for a very short time.  The reason for this is that because of being attached to previous samskaras [acquired tendencies],  the consciousness, immediately afterwards, again gradually becomes unhappy.  Therefore, in order to make the happiness just mentioned long-lasting, one must practice a kriya [technique/work] that purifies samskaras and creates inner happiness.  When, by Sadguru’s instructions, the flinging out, meaning shooting out, of prana-air, and again its drawing back, meaning attraction - by the Kriya of this rechak and purak, there is samskara-purification, and happiness remains for a long time.  This subjectt has been explained in the eighth sloka of the fourth chapter.  These sutras teach on the way of keeping the mind happy, while the latter five slokas teach on how to keep the mind from going after things and thereby cast off restlessness, and thus remain in steadfastness.  As in - vishayavati va pravrittirutpanna manasah sthiti nibandhini -  Samadhipada - no. 35 vishoka va jyotismati -  Samadhipada - no. 36 vitaraga vishayam va chittasya -  Samadhipada - no. 37 svapnidrajnanalambanam va -  Samadhipada - no. 38 yathabhimatadhyanat va -  Samadhipada - no. 39 Keeping the mind happy by the above-mentioned type of technique, the all-pervading Sound of Space, the touch of the prana-air within, the sight of the inexhaustible Light, the Nectarous Ambrosia flowing from the Sahasrara, inner divine scent etc. - when any such type of inner experience arises in consciousness, the mind no longer goes after external things and remains steadily in that.  Among these, one of the highest methods is this:  coming to the place of ahamkara through the door of sushumna by Sadguru’s instruction, here one experiences:  from the plane of the sun - an incredibly powerful, and from the plane of the moon - an incredibly lovely, and together - a Light of such sublime beauty that experiencing it casts away all types of suffering and grief from the mind.  For this reason, this has been called by great saints as “vishokajyoti” [the Light that ends grief].  If this vishokajyoti is revealed and consciousness is surrendered in it, then the mind becomes completely steadfast and still. Having explained in these two sutras [Samadhipada - no. 35 and 36] about the method by which the mind can be tied to a certain thing and thereby gain steadiness, it is being instructed in the next two sutras [Samadhipada - no. 37 and 38] on how one can disengage the mind from things and keep it still.  By determining between imperishable and perishable things and allowing non-attachment to arise in relation to things of sound, touch, sight, taste, smell etc., and disengaging the mind from all those things, the mind naturally becomes still by itself.  The way to make this condition more permanent is this:  by the aforementioned technique received from Sadguru, the mind becomes happy and wisdom is established revealing: “there is no existence of anything in this Universe other than Infinite Consciousness, but because jivas are covered in ignorance and are living as if asleep, it is being imagined that there are many kinds of things that have subsistence and are being experienced.”  Realizing this experience with certainty, the mind becomes unwaveringly still.  Having instructed these four sutras to the Sadguru-graced sadhakas, in the fifth sutra [Samadhipada - no. 39], teaching is being given on what to do to attain stillness of mind in sadhana if it is not possible to acquire the grace of Sadguru or the aforementioned method.  If one is not successful at being able to have the aforementioned type of technique, then enjoining the mind’s focus on any one thing which can deemed appropriate according to one’s country, time and personal condition will also make the mind still.  In this way, stilling the mind by some method and practicing keeping it in equipoise is called “practicing ektattva” in yogic scriptures.  It has been expressed as “doing sadhana with a unified mind” in the Srimad Bhagavad Gita. Now, if one reads these four slokas [Gita 6:11 through 6:14] intently, it can be clearly understood that He has instructed to practice all of the aforementioned parts of yoga altogether at the same time in the manner of ektattva which is antidote to the obstacles to yoga.  The aforementioned four slokas are being explained below. By practicing ektattva, the counteraction to the obstacles to yoga - such as physical and mental problems, confusion etc. - unifying the mind, renouncing envy, fear etc., eliminating restlessness of mind through chastity, devoting oneself to God with a tranquil mind, disciplining oneself in cleanliness and such other niyamas, seating oneself in a sanctified place on a seat which has kusha grass as its base, on top of which there is skin of deer or such animal, and on top of which there is some good quality cloth, sitting not too high and not too low, using a method of sitting that will keep the body, head and neck without movement and balanced as well as in comfort, withdrawing sight from all sides and putting it at the root of the nose, extinguishing all restlessness of the senses, preparing the mind for concentration by purifying oneself, practicing the yogic technique of pranayam for the elimination of ignorance which covers Consciousness, concentrating the mind in Kutasthachaitanya and intently remaining enjoined in Its meditation, consciousness becomes one with It.  When by this type of absorption wisdom is realized, sadhakas experience the Consciousness-Self as the Supreme Being, and live in Total Awakenedness united with that Atman-Consciousness. - 11, 12, 13 and 14-