### Prose 
 --- 
यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत |
अभ्युत्थानमधर्मस्य तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् || 7||
yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata
abhyutthānam adharmasya tadātmānaṁ sṛijāmyaham

### Transliteration 
 --- 
yada yada hi dharmasya glanirbhavati bharata abhyutthanamadharmasya tadatmanam srijamyaham - 7-

### Translation 
 --- 
When sin is rampant and virtue [dharma] is not Then I manifest Myself, Dhananjaya - 7-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: It is necessary to know what is “dharma” before commenting on this sloka.  I will try my best to explain this subject below. The Western scholars had deduced that heat and force constituted the life-energy in this world.  The great scientist Tyndal concluded that heat is also a type of force or shakti in motion.  Now, in all scientific treatises of this country and the West, it has been extensively proven that shakti (force) is the life of the Universe, and that it is indestructible; it never ceases to exist.  When shakti engages any inert matter, it remains present there eternally.  This solar system is endlessly orbiting with its planets and satellites because of this law.  From this a question can appear that if shakti uses a stone and that stone travels endlessly in space without stopping, then what stops it, and how, if shakti does not diminish, does it cease?  It has been concluded in science that for the stone to travel on its own, shakti employs the gravitational force of the earth and the air.  When force is used in this way, the stone becomes forceless and stops.  That is not the diminution of shakti; it is only a transfer of power from one object to another.  Therefore, shakti is infinite and thus unborn.  It is this shakti that rules in all matter as the forces of attraction and repulsion, by which It is making the existence of innumerable designs of matter and scenarios possible, through birth and death, again and again.  These two types of shakti is in every atom of the world.  The attraction aspect of the shakti in atoms and molecules is called “anavik asakti” (molecular attraction), and the repulsion aspect is called “abhyantarika taap” (latent heat).  Because of the shakti of molecular attraction, the atoms and molecules are bound to each other and are perpetually manifesting this world-Brahmanda.  And because of that heat or repulsion shakti, the atoms and molecules have divided and created the different and separate forms of this world-Brahmanda.  It is by the power of this shakti of Prakriti that all molecules take on the five states - kshiti (solid), ap (liquid), teja (subgaseous), marut (gaseous) and vyoma (ethereal).*  The scholars of shastra have called these “suksham bhutas” or “mahabhutas.”  It is they who, by mixing with one another, are appearing as this physical world.  Their abilities are amazing.  They are breaking down this material world and again reconstructing everything appropriate for the existence of the jiva.  By these, all jivas are designed according to what is appropriate in terms of the materials necessary for existence, and after the leaving the body, again by them does the jiva take a new form as necessary and reenter samsara.  In this way, it is by their power that all matter in this world is created, sustained and dissolved, and it is because of their presence that this world-Brahmanda is existing. [*Translator’s note:  kshiti, ap, teja, marut and vyoma are also the Sanskrit names of the five elements - earth, water, fire, air and ether, respectively.] The neutralized state of these forces of attraction and repulsion is the unmanifest potential condition of the world.  Just as when a neutralized magnet is altered for some reason it becomes imbued with the three gunas sattva (neuter), raja (positive) and tama (negative) and manifests attractive and repulsive forces, in the same way, when the neutralized Infinite Brahman-Consciousness’ unmanifest potential condition, meaning the condition of Prakriti is altered in the slightest, the three gunas sattva (neuter), raja (positive) and tama (negative) appear, spawning attractive and repulsive forces which create the world in its many forms.  The neutralized state of the sattva, raja and tamogunas born of the world-creating Shakti is called the unmanifest potential state, the revealed condition or Prakriti of that Infinite Brahman-Consciousness.  As in- sattvarajastamasam samyavastha prakritirityadi -   ka. su. 1:61 When this gunas of Prakriti rest even for a moment, this vast solar system dissolves with its planets and satellites, and this Universe at once disappears.  Creation is existing by holding the revealed condition or Prakriti of this Infinite Consciousness.  That which can be held on to is called “dharma” (dhri - holding).  Therefore, the only “dharma” in this vast solar system and this Universe is the realization of this Eternal Brahman-Consciousness. Now, this sloka can be explained as such:  when the revealed condition of this Eternal Brahman-Consciousness, meaning Prakriti’s quality-less or neutralized or inner-directed state-dharma, is altered, then the outer-directed, Consciousness-hidden “adharma” [non-dharma] state manifests, giving rise to the three gunas with the forces of attraction and repulsion, by which that Eternal Consciousness plays out Its own “sport” [lila] in innumerable ways, meaning that via the vehicles of different bodies, It appears as this visible world. - 7-