### Prose 
 --- 
श्रोत्रादीनीन्द्रियाण्यन्ये संयमाग्निषु जुह्वति |
शब्दादीन्विषयानन्य इन्द्रियाग्निषु जुह्वति || 26||
śhrotrādīnīndriyāṇyanye sanyamāgniṣhu juhvati
śhabdādīn viṣhayānanya indriyāgniṣhu juhvati

### Transliteration 
 --- 
shrotradinindriyanyanye samyamagnishu juhvati shabdadin vishayananya indriyagnishu juhvati - 26-

### Translation 
 --- 
All senses such as hearing in the fire of discipline The celibate monks subjugate them by the power of Knowledge The united householder offers the senses Control in all things by Knowledge - 26-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: Brahmacharis [celibate monks], by methods of withdrawal such as pratyahara, bring all the senses under control and live unaffected by the work of the senses. Householders fulfill all matters present in a state of being free of like and dislike and without attachment to anything, and thereby they wear away prarabdha. Mentioning “grihashrami[s]” [resident[s] of the ashram of the home] immediately brings the worldly life to mind, but there are many differences between worldly life and grihashram[s] [home as ashram[s]]. Through evolution and the gradual revelation of prana and mind, the jiva progresses into plants, animals, birds and many such forms. Then, when the power of intellect is realized, it transforms into the form of a human being. Until this [human] state finds refuge, up to that time it takes birth again and again due to the intellect-generated prarabdha of many kinds causing the need to fulfill desires, and according to the fluctuations of mind in oneself, the jiva is bound to the manifestations of those tendencies as laughter, tears, running around etc. by which it is ever anxiously engrossed in passing life in this way, eventually ending in the jaws of time. Some think of themselves as worthless and are engaged in satisfying others such as wife, children etc., whom they believe to have power over them. Some think themselves to be the ones with power and become greatly involved in showing themselves off. Some see themselves as kings and rulers and spend time in war and strife. Some think of themselves as clever ministers of government and pass their lives in mental pursuits in order to rule the world-Brahmanda. But the strange thing is that throughout time, those who wear the outfits of lordship never take a look at themselves. That I am floating in the current of prarabdha, that I have no place to stand, that if this body is destroyed right now, who knows what will happen to this costume and power and who knows where prarabdha will take one and throw one into who knows what kind of great convolution - not even once do they look at all these things. Thus, because of this kind of lack of self-examination causing one to exist in a state of being without a spiritual home and thereby being always engaged in work towards others, the scriptural scholars have called this condition “nirashraya” [without refuge]. Once observation falls upon oneself, the jivas look to take refuge in order to be rescued from this ocean of prarabdha. These shelters - ashrams - are of four types: brahmacharyashram, grihasthashram, banaprasthashram and sannyasashram. In times past, care would be taken to start the son of a householder in the practice of brahmacharya once the age of seven had passed. If the child was well-mannered, calm, good at studies, and able to leave his mother and father to live in an acharyashram, then he would be enrolled in an acharyashram. A sacred thread was given to the children at the time of leaving for the acharayashram, signifying their purity. This sacred-thread ceremony is called “upanayan.” Living in an ashram such as this, children would study the Brahman-Knowledge-illuminating Vedas etc. according to the instructions of the acharya, and would spend the days in the discipline of brahmacharya with its various edicts and formalities. Not to speak of the company of women or of blindly ignorant sudras, there was no chance of even seeing them. This is called “brahmacharyashram.” The eighth year was understood to be the best time for a child to attain “brahminness.” Even the ages of up to nine or ten years were considered suitable for children to receive the education of brahmins. But if the tenth year had passed and upanayan was performed on the eleventh year, the acharyas would not teach that child the Vedas and such scriptures; instead, the education appropriate for kshatriyas - the political, governmental and military education - was given for the sustenance of livelihood. If the eleventh year had passed and upanayan was performed on the twelfth year, then instead of teaching the child the subtle and intricate intellectual matters of governmental work, the education appropriate for vaishyas - commerce and trade - was given for the sustenance of livelihood. But if the child had not been enrolled in an acharyashram within the twelfth year, then the maturation of sperm would cause the senses to become restless and the child would become devoid of patience, and therefore it would not be possible for the to acquire knowledge. This is called “the death of Savitri,” and because of this, one would not be accepted in an acharyashram once the twelfth year had passed. As in - garbhadharnadashtame janmato va, moujibandhah sashyate brahmananam rajanyanamnuynamekadashehabde vaishyanantu dvadashehabde vadanti The eighth year from the day of birth is the suitable time for upanayan for brahmins, meaning the suitable time for the child to have the upanayan ceremony in order to acquire brahminness - the eleventh year for kshatriyas and the twelfth year for vaishyas. In this way, according to individual capacity - some in three years, some in twelve - children would gain knowledge from the acharya and become fit to live in a disciplined, steadfast and desireless way in the temptation-filled society, and understanding that by living with and taking care of mother, father and relations, and leading the happy, married life of a householder, the jiva could wear away prarabdha and attain peace very easily, they would once again return home. This is called “samavartan.” Thus, having acquired special knowledge as to one’s personal vocation, the youth would take up the making of a livelihood and the work of a householder while practicing the guru-instructed methods such as “sandhya vandana.” Those who wear away their prarabdha in this way by fulfilling the matters of desire while being engaged in the work of the householder are called “grihasthashrami[s].” Thus, the twice-born would leave the brahmacharyashram, marry at the age of twenty-four and have a child by the age of twenty-five. The child would be raised and educated, and would go through the upanayan ceremony. And when the child was ready after having been trained in a brahmacharyashram, the man would oversee his son’s marriage in his son’s twenty-fourth year and would stay one more year to see the birth of his grandson, after which, at around the man’s fiftieth year, he would renounce the household and leave to live in the forest. This is called “banaprastha ashram.” In this way of life, people would often leave the jungle in search of a Sadguru and travel from pilgrimage to pilgrimage. Then, if they were able to obtain the grace of some saint, they would renounce all restlessness and try to establish themselves in Atman-Consciousness. This is what is called “sannyasashram.” People in this ashram completely renounce the body, senses, prana-substances and all fluctuations of consciousness, and thus attaining Supreme Tranquility, they merge with the Brahman-Substance. Those who would not have had the upanayan service done for them would be work as ignorant sudras in the service of the three varnas of brahmins, kshatriyas and vaishyas. Then, if a son or daughter of the family or such someone would be able to take over the householder duties, they would also for the sake of their own liberation seek out the refuge of some saint and go on pilgrimages; and when the Unseen would be pleased and they would receive the grace of some saint, by performing many kinds of yogakriyas, they would control their minds, and upon achieving that, they would merge with that Supreme Brahman-Substance. The “grihasthashram” that was mentioned previously is not the worldly life. This ashram is the second type of the four types of ashrams. It is in the refuge of this that jivas are able to live in great happiness and complete the fulfillment of the terrible prarabdha and thus ascend to Supreme Tranquility. This is the highly excellent path to take for the elimination of prarabdha. - 26-