### Prose 
 --- 
अपाने जुह्वति प्राणं प्राणेऽपानं तथापरे |
प्राणापानगती रुद्ध्वा प्राणायामपरायणा: || 29||
apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpare
prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ
apare niyatāhārāḥ prāṇān prāṇeṣhu juhvati
sarve ’pyete yajña-vido yajña-kṣhapita-kalmaṣhāḥ

अपरे नियताहारा: प्राणान्प्राणेषु जुह्वति |
सर्वेऽप्येते यज्ञविदो यज्ञक्षपितकल्मषा: || 30||
apāne juhvati prāṇaṁ prāṇe ’pānaṁ tathāpare
prāṇāpāna-gatī ruddhvā prāṇāyāma-parāyaṇāḥ
apare niyatāhārāḥ prāṇān prāṇeṣhu juhvati
sarve ’pyete yajña-vido yajña-kṣhapita-kalmaṣhāḥ

यज्ञशिष्टामृतभुजो यान्ति ब्रह्म सनातनम् |
नायं लोकोऽस्त्ययज्ञस्य कुतोऽन्य: कुरुसत्तम || 31||
yajña-śhiṣhṭāmṛita-bhujo yānti brahma sanātanam
nāyaṁ loko ’styayajñasya kuto ’nyaḥ kuru-sattama

### Transliteration 
 --- 
apane juhvati pranam pranohpanam tathapare pranapanagati ruddhah pranayama parayanah - 29- apare niyataharah pranan praneshu juhvati sarvehpyete yajnavido yajnakshayita kalmashah - 30- yajnashishtamritabhujo yanti brahma sanatanam nayam lokohstyayajnasya kutohnyahh kurusattam - 31-

### Translation 
 --- 
Offering apana into the prana at the time of purak At the time of rechak offering prana into apana In kumbhak the movement of prana and apana stop Some do this yajna of pranayam - 29- Eating little and weakening the senses Some do sacrifice in prana like this The wisdom of yajna is because of yajna Destroying all sins and attaining Vishnu - 30- Finishing yajna they drink immortal ambrosia Easily they realize the Universal Para Brahman This plane is not for the one who does not do yajna Listen great one, what more can I say to people - 31-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: By rechak Kriya, sadhakas take the pranavayu residing above in the sushumna and offer it as oblation into the apanavayu residing at the bottom of the spine, and again by purak Kriya they lift the apanavayu from below and merge it into the pranavayu above. This has been mentioned in the yogashastras as “kevali pranayam.” By this, the movement of prana and apana stops naturally and on its own, stilling the mind and all prana, manifesting eternal happiness and illuminating the lamp of Knowledge. When the mind and prana are still in this way, the inhalation and exhalation of the physical airs, speech, body, sight - all of these things - also become still. One can ascertain the level of consciousness-absorption by these physical signs. This matter is written about in the yogic scriptures. As in - yatha yatha sadabhyasanmanasah sthirata bhavet vayu, vakkaya drishtinam sthiratashcha tatha tatha Extinguishing all such internal and external restlessness and attaining stillness, all hindrances and problems disappear within, and the eternal happiness of consciousness is manifested; and by the revelation of all awareness, the knowledge of discrimination is brilliantly illuminated. Some sadhakas practice disciplines regarding food and they merge the pranic faculties into each other by that practice. These matters of food are particularly expounded upon in the yogic scriptures. Here, one or two of the things about this written in the Mahabharata as part of a conversion with Bhisma is shown below. As in - kanam takshaneyuktah pinyakasya cha bharata snehanam varjaneyukto yogi balamavapnuyat bhunjanoyavakam ruksham dirghakalamarindam ekaharo vishuddhatma yogibalamavapnuyat panchan masan ritumshchaiva samyatsavanahastatha apah pitva payomishram yogibalamavapnuyat Putting aside oily/fatty food that may be dear, for the sake of purification at the end of the day, yogis gain yogic power by eating ground cereal in a paste. Yogis also gain yogic power by drinking milk mixed with water every day for one fortnight, one month, one season - meaning two months - or one year. Although every sadhaka does not have to follow the rules of eating in the manner mentioned above, still, everyone who wishes to practice the Consciousness-revealing Kriya must use temperance in food - become “mitahari[s]” - in order to eliminate impurities in the mind. Just a little bit of negligence in this causes the appearance of many kinds of diseases and negativity in the mind, by which Consciousness becomes covered up and one falls from practicing Kriya. This has been specifically stated in yogic scriptures. As in - mitaharam vinayastu yogarambhancha karayet nanaroga bhavettasya kinchidyoga na siddhati Many types of ailments arise in the yogi who performs any kind of yogakriya without being a mitahari, and none of his work is successful. Now, the teaching in regards to the matter of mitahar [eating temperately] as given in yogic scriptures is expressed below. As in - annena purayetardham toyena tu turiyakam udarasya turiyam samrakshayet vayuchalane shuddham sumadhuram snigdam udaradhvana varjjitam bhujyate surasam pritya mitaharamimam viduh Food such as rice should occupy half of the stomach (medham havishyamityuktam prashastam sattvikam laghu), meaning sacredly prepared sattvic and light substances; one-fourth of the space should be for liquids, and one-fourth should be empty so that air may breathe. The food to eat should be pure, tasty, sweet, gentle and by which air does not spread in the belly, and should be eaten in a peaceful state of mind. This is called mitahar. The previously mentioned Kriyavan sadhakas of all types destroy all tendencies of self-ruin by the path of Kriya as directed by their individual Gurus, and attaining nectarous Tranquility at the end of Kriya, they remain absorbed in the Eternal Universal Brahman-Substance. But the persons without Kriya - not to speak of the afterworld, meaning the Greatest Infinite Spiritual Happiness of the Bliss of Brahman - are not even able to obtain the little happiness of the human world, meaning that they are not able to have happiness in the matters of the body. In the Patanjal philosophical treatises this subject is written about in this way, as in - yogashchitta vritti nirodhah - no. 2 tadadrashtu svarupehavasthanam - no. 3 vritti svarupyamitaratra - no. 4 - Sadhanapada The ending of the fluctuations of consciousness is what is called “yoga.” By this, sadhakas residing in its still and tranquil state are able to clearly and deeply know the nature of all things in the world. In other cases, human beings become tremendously involved in the manifestations of the fluctuations caused by restlessness. The fulfillment of prarabdha, meaning the fulfillment of desires associated with the fluctuations, meaning that if the fluctuations are of an unpleasant nature, then immediately despondency sets in and one becomes filled with anxiety and sorrow; and when those matters of fulfillment are of a pleasant nature then a great attraction comes and all those prarabdha karmas are enjoyed through dancing, laughter etc., and one is not even aware of how it is happening. And one does not understand all of the changes that are taking place because of partaking in those things; one only is totally involved in the indulgence of physical enjoyments like an animal. The significant thing here is that because lower life-forms do not possess the power of intellect, they steadily evolve into higher and higher states according to natural law. But these people go beyond natural law by the use of intellect; some evolve higher, and some fall and again have take to take the forms of insects etc. For them nothing is stable. - 29, 30 and 31-