### Prose 
 --- 
एवं बुद्धे: परं बुद्ध्वा संस्तभ्यात्मानमात्मना |
जहि शत्रुं महाबाहो कामरूपं दुरासदम् || 43||
evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā sanstabhyātmānam ātmanā
jahi śhatruṁ mahā-bāho kāma-rūpaṁ durāsadam

### Transliteration 
 --- 
evam buddhehparam buddha samstabhyatmanamatmana jahi shatrum mahavaho kamarupam durasadam - 43-

### Translation 
 --- 
Knowing the Atman beyond the intellect By intellect keeping the mind disciplined The enemy, desire, whom you can know in sorrow For its destruction engage yourself, Dhananjaya - 43-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: In this way, realizing the Atman beyond the intellect, keeping oneself separate from all of the senses, mind, intellect etc. and abiding in Consciousness only, one should destroy this evil enemy - desire, who is difficult to capture, right at the beginning. - 43- SUMMARIZED DESCRIPTION OF CHAPTER 3: Listening to the matters of karma [action] and jnana [knowledge] in the previous chapter, this type of experience occurs in the rajoguna that - if knowledge is greater than action, then what is the need for this intense work (battle)?  In this way, seeing its intellect as being deluded, it relies upon the Kutasthachaitanya [1 - 2].  There, the awareness emerges that discipline is of two types.  The ones of jnana practice jnanayoga in a state of non-doing, and because of that Knowledge itself, sadhakas have to perform yogakriya.  Without the performance of yogakriya, not even for a moment can one reside in the state of non-doing; instead, one does karma in an unaware way, being enslaved by the usual likes and dislikes, and by only forcing the organs of action to be subjugated like the sannyasis do, one cannot achieve non-doing, because the mind, in its perpetual habit, constantly remains engaged in sense objects.  Without work, even the body cannot be maintained; therefore it is superior to do work [Kriya] than not.  It is true that by all kinds of karma one is bound to this worldly life, but only by the performing the Consciousness-revealing Kriya [work] does the jiva attain liberation.  Therefore, keeping the organs of perception controlled by the mind, one should use the organs of action with continuous desireless awareness and perform yogakriya [7 -9].  Saints have perceived through prajna that by nourishing the body of providence through Kriya as the desires of mind come up and pacifying the body of providence by fulfilling such through Kriya, the jiva tastes the Immortal Nectar and attains liberation.  But if the jiva does not do so and uses the manifestation of miraculous Divinity for further enjoyment of sense-pleasures, then there is a possibility of great detriment [10 - 13].  By the Eternally-present Form of Brahman-Consciousness - Kutasthachaitanya - performing yogakriya causes the manifestation of Ambrosia from the Sahasrar [14 -15].  Those who do not endeavor in this type of practice in this body - the lives of those sense-addicted persons are in vain, and their life-span passes in great sufferning [16].  Those who remain in the Self in satisfaction and contentment, they do not need to perform any karma, because they have no diminution or expansion; they also do not have to take refuge in anything for any reason.  Therefore, in order to attain this Supreme Substance, one should always desirelessly perform Kriya [17 -19].  Sages such as Janaka have attained Kaivalyapada by this yogakriya.  Rajoguna is supreme in Kriya; whatever is established by this is followed by the other faculties.  Therefore, if only for the purpose of keeping the faculties of pravritti - which have taken the evil road - on the path of Atman, one should perform Kriya [20 -21].  There is nothing that Consciousness does not possess in the Universe, and nothing is unattainable for It.  If Consciousness did not remain present and beyond the senses, meaning if It were even slightly in stupor, then by the arising of many kinds of delusionary knowledge, all jivas would become devoid of knowledge and become as if dead [22 - 24].  The ignorant act under the power of desire and its enjoyment.  The wise do not behave like the ignorant, and to gather the faculties of pravritti which have taken the wrong road on to the path of Atman, they perform yogakriya with a consciousness devoid of desire and its need for enjoyment [25 - 26].  The senses act on things.  The ignorant, believing the Atman to be the sense-based ego substance, think themselves to be the doers of all those karmas.  But the wise remain tranquil, knowing the Atman to be uninvolved and beyond all twenty-four matters of the senses; they do not engage themselves in any kind of judgment of the ignorant with little understanding [27 - 29].  The senses of even the knowledgeable can - because of habit and the influence of their personal samskaras - express affection towards favorable things, and hatred toward unfavorable things.  They do not have a reason to become involved with that enemy of Knowledge.  Therefore, one should remain unaffected by like and dislike, renounce all perception of blame, and surrendering all with desireless consciousness to Atman, become engaged in Atman-Kriya.  One should not turn away from this because of many different kinds of doubts.  If that happens, one becomes enveloped in ignorance and has to live in samsara in an unaware state.  Even though Atman-Kriya is without form, it is superior to actions of desire that have beautiful form, because the jiva becomes bound and has to go through this horrific suffering due to these actions of desire [30 - 35].  After this type of experience, a question arises in the fire element that - who forces the jiva into destroying itself, even though it does not want to? [36]  Then, when consciousness is focused in the Kutasthachaitanya, the experience occurs that - just as fire by smoke, a mirror by dust and the embryo-child by the amnion are covered, in the same way, the eternal enemy of Knowledge - the insatiable fire of desire, and anger, which is born of it, by delusion envelope the knowledge present in the senses, mind and intellect and lead one to self-destruction [37 - 40].  Therefore, one should control the senses and destroy this knowledge- and wisdom-destroying evil desire right at the beginning [41].  The senses are supreme in this body; greater than that is the mind and even greater is the intellect.  But one should reside in the awakened awareness of Atman - Who is the Greatest of All, and eradicate this very evasive enemy in the form of desire [42 - 43]. Thus ends the third chapter of the yogashastra upanishad Srimad Bhagavad Gita with analysis via various scriptures of this country and the West, along with spiritual commentary.