### Prose 
 --- 
भूमिरापोऽनलो वायु: खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च |
अहङ्कार इतीयं मे भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा || 4||
bhūmir-āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva cha
ahankāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛitir aṣhṭadhā

अपरेयमितस्त्वन्यां प्रकृतिं विद्धि मे पराम् |
जीवभूतां महाबाहो ययेदं धार्यते जगत् || 5||
apareyam itas tvanyāṁ prakṛitiṁ viddhi me parām
jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

### Transliteration 
 --- 
bhumirapohnalo vayuh kham manobuddhireva cha ahamkara itiyam me bhinna prakritirashtadha - 4- aparayemitastvanyam prakritim viddhi me param jivabhutam mahabaho yayedam dharyate jagat - 5-

### Translation 
 --- 
Earth, water, fire, air, space Mind, intellect, ego - these eight This is called Prakriti, say all the Vedas What is beyond this, I will tell you - listen of that which penetrates Prakriti Para Prakriti it is called, know this That which is holding samsara - 5-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: The two fundamental aspects which compose this Cosmos, by which the Cosmos exists, comprise the subject that is being elucidated in this sloka. Now, discussing how this matter has been analyzed in philosophical treatises will make it possible to clearly understand this subject; for this reason, those analyses are being explained below in a condensed form. In the philosophical and scientific treatises of this country and the West, it has been concluded that this Cosmos with its innumerable solar systems has been created by two fundamental substances.  One is material-substance (matter), and the other is Consciousness-Substance (Spirit).  Brahman-Consciousness (God the Father), or the part/piece of Brahman-Consciousness (Son), or Its Cosmos-revealing Kutasthachaitanya (the Holy Ghost), is the Eternal Substance beyond and before creation (ever existing).  Brahman-Consciousness, or Its part - jiva, or Its revelatory aspect - Kutasthachaitanya (God, Son, and Holy Ghost) - these three substances are not different things; they are one thing only; and, the fundamental causes of creation - matter and Consciousness (matter and Spirit) - these two are also not separate things from That; they are only Its two Prakriti-aspects, or Its Shakti. Although this material-Prakriti (matter) is not able to do the work of creation completely on its own, because of its proximity to Param Purush, like iron in the proximity of a magnet, it becomes imbued with Consciousness (spirited) and is transformed into a new type of substance.  This new substance is that which is the primary cause of creation - known as “mahat tattva.”  For this reason, the saintly scriptural scholars refer to this as “mahattattva.”  As in Samkhyadarshan - “sattvarajastamasam samyavastham prakritiprakritermahan” etc. - no. 59 “tat sannidhanadadhishthatritvam manivat” -  no. 94  ity vishayadhayah Material-Prakriti itself, having been imbued with Consciousness and transformed into the form of mahattattva, moves towards Consciousness as iron in the proximity of a magnet, and in the process of transforming into Consciousness, an effort-quality or energetic quality arises. The saintly scriptural scholars call this energy/effort-endowed part of the mahattattva “buddhi” [loosely - intellect]. Its function is dharma. That which is known as “dharma” while residing in the state of the revelation of Consciousness-Self has been explained in the commentary to the fifth sloka of the fourth chapter of this book. It is with the help of this energetic-quality-endowed part of mahattattva - the action of the buddhi - that the revelation of Consciousness, meaning Kaivalyapada, is attained. Because of the solidifying of the previous samskaras [inclinations or impressions] of this very mahattattva, the other parts become somewhat colored and become transformed to work counter to that [the actions of buddhi], meaning “adharma” [not-dharma], which becomes the manifestation of the many types of created forms of things. It is this contrary functioning part that the saintly scriptural scholars call “mana” [loosely - mind]. In this way, the same Consciousness-imbued material-Prakriti, or mahattattva, is itself referred to by the two names of “buddhi” when enjoined with the effort-energetic quality, which is dharmic or holy, and when solidified and colored as “mana,” which is non-dharmic or the created form. As in Samkhyadarshan - “adhyavasayo buddhih” - no. 13 “tatkaryam dharmah” - no. 14 “mahaduparagadviparitam” - no. 15 - ity pradhana karyadhyayah “mahadadyam karyam tanmanah” - no. 69 - ity vishayadhyayah When material-Prakriti becomes imbued with Consciousness and is thus transformed into the aforementioned form of mahattattva, a type of self-consciousness - “I am a separate thing” - arises. The saintly scriptural scholars call this extreme type of self-conscious vanity or such transformation of material-Prakriti as “ahamkar.” As in Samkhyadarshan - “charamohamkarah” - no. 70 - ity vishayadhyayah “abhimanohhamkarah” - no. 16 - ity pradhana karyadhyah [Translator’s note: In the next paragraph, as well as throughout the body of the book, there are differently written variations of the gunas commonly written as “rajas” and “tamas” and their extensions such as “rajaguna” or “rajoguna.” These variations have been transliterated as they have appeared in their various forms, including their expressions as multiple words or as one compound word.] In this way, from a state in which the three gunas are in a neutralized* condition, Prakriti becomes polarized,* and transformed into the dharmic- and non-dharmic-elements-embodying ahamkar, and because of this, sattva (neuter), raja (positive) and tamah (negative) - these three gunas arise; and this rajoguna is endowed with the capacity of action and is mixed with sattva and tama gunas. In this way, the one polarized Prakriti, transformed into the dharmic- and non-dharmic-elements-embodying form of ahamkar, is imbued with sattva, rajasic sattva, raja, rajasictama and tama, and because of the imbuing by these five types of gunas, the saintly scriptural scholars refer to each guna-embodying part with individual and separate names; meaning: the tamaguna-embodying part is called “kshiti” or “bhumi” [earth]; the rajasic tamaguna-embodying part is “ap” [water or liquid]; the rajaguna-embodying part is called “teja” or “anel” [energy/fire]; the rajasic sattvaguna-embodying part is called “marut” [air]; and the sattvaguna-embodying part is called “vyom,” “akash” or “kha” [ether or space]. They have delineated [these parts] by these five names. In Vedantadarshan, these have been expressed as the five elements. [*Translator’s note: The words “neutralized” and “polarized” are in English in the original, but are enclosed in parentheses, indicating them to be definitions of their Bengali counterparts. The parenthetical occurrences - ( ) - in the previous paragraph of this translation are in the original and the words within them are in English in the original. The bracketed words in the previous paragraph - [ ] - are the translator’s, and they are explanations of the Sanskrit words appearing before them.] This Universe is built from this permutation of ahamkar, or the five elements which have themselves been converted into the five subtle elements. Beyond the aggregate of the five sattvic parts of these five subtle elements is the eleventh sense - mind; and everyone’s five sattvaguna parts spawn the five organs of perception, and the five rajoguna parts create the five organs of action; and in everyone, the five tamaguna parts create the five matters, or just the five working in five ways with each other, manifesting as the physical elements in the form of that which can be partaken of for the purpose of the aforementioned eleventh sense’s partaking, and thus, these [together] make up the construction of the Cosmos in its many different forms. As in - “tatkaryatvamanyeyam” - no. 71 - ity samkhyadarshane vishayadhyayah “ekadasham panchatanmatram tatkaryam” - no. 17 “sattvikamekadashakam pravartate vaikritadahamkarat” - no. 18 - ity samkhyadarshane pradhana karyadhyayeh “gunabhavadvyajamano mahana pradurvabhuvaha” - ity vayupurane “sattvamshaih panchabhistesham kramaddhindriyapanchakam shrotratvagakshirasana ghranakhyamupajayate” - no. 19 “rajohmshaih panchabhistesham kramat karmendriyanitu vakpanipadapayupasthabhidhanani jajnire” - no. 21 “tadbhogaya punarbhogya bhogayatanajanmane panchikaroti bhagavan pratyekam vishayadikam” - no. 26 - ity panchadashyam tattvavivekah In this way, from the state of the neutralized condition of the three gunas, the one material-Prakriti itself, having become enjoined with Consciousness, is endowed with an effort/energy quality by which it becomes the dharmic “buddhi,” then the manifestation-oriented [adharmic] “mana,” and thereafter the combination dharma and adharma - “ahamkar”; and due to the permutation of the three gunas mentioned, and the active capacity of the energy of rajoguna, “kshiti” [earth or solid], “ap” [water or liquid], “teja” [fire or heat], “marut” [air or gaseous] and “vyom” [ether or space] - these eight forms [including “buddhi,” “mana,” and “ahamkar”] are imbued with the gunas, and by their manifested work has this world-Brahmanda been constructed. But it is because of the presence of the aforementioned Consciousness-Power [Chaitanyashakti] that all of creation, even atomic particles, are alive, and thus continue to properly sustain this Universe. A momentary lack of this Chaitanyashakti results in all atomic particles in the world-Brahmanda to become devoid of power, whereupon this vast Brahmanda contracts and the Cosmos becomes completely non-existent. Therefore, this infinite Cosmos with Brahmanda has only been constructed by the previously-mentioned permutation of the physical-Shakti enjoined with the eight qualities, but it is existing in living form upon having taken recourse in this Consciousness-Power. The way that Maharshi Vyasdev has expressed the above-mentioned spiritual essence in these two slokas is being explained below. Earth, water, fire, air, and space, and mana [mind], buddhi [intellect] and ahamkar [ego] - these eight-essence-enjoined material-Prakriti, by whose permutated substance this world-Brahmanda is comprised - that is only a small physical-Shakti of Infinite Consciousness; but there is another Consciousness-Power - Chaitanyashakti - because of taking recourse in which this Cosmos is existing in a living form - that is what is known as the Supreme Power of the Universe-pervading Infinite Consciousness. - 4 and 5-