### Prose 
 --- 
अस्माकं तु विशिष्टा ये तान्निबोध द्विजोत्तम |
नायका मम सैन्यस्य संज्ञार्थं तान्ब्रवीमि ते || 7||
asmākaṁ tu viśhiṣhṭā ye tānnibodha dwijottama
nāyakā mama sainyasya sanjñārthaṁ tānbravīmi te

भवान्भीष्मश्च कर्णश्च कृपश्च समितिञ्जय: |
अश्वत्थामा विकर्णश्च सौमदत्तिस्तथैव च || 8||
bhavānbhīṣhmaśhcha karṇaśhcha kṛipaśhcha samitiñjayaḥ
aśhvatthāmā vikarṇaśhcha saumadattis tathaiva cha

### Transliteration 
 --- 
asmakantu vishishta ye tannibodha dvijottam nayaka mama sainyasya samjnanartham tan brabimi te -  7 - bhavan bhismashcha karnashcha kripashcha samitinjayah ashvatthama vikarnashcha soumadattirjayadratha* -  8 -

### Translation 
 --- 
No translation

### Commentary 
 --- 
[*Translator’s note:  In some versions of the Gita, the last line of sloka eight reads:  “ashvathvama vikarnashcha soumadattis tathaiva cha.”  The version being translated here mentions “Jayadratha.”  The footnoted version just mentioned does not.] Poetically: The greatest of our soldiers Listen guru to their names The primary charioteers of our soldiers I present them for you to hear - 7- You and Bhisma, Karna, Krip - great warriors The son of Drona, Vikarna, Jayadratha and Bhurishrava - 8- Commentary: The five kleshas [troubles], karma and its detrimental consequence - samskara, and ambition, meaning desires - these ones are the great obstacles on the path of liberation.  Regarding this, it is written in the Patanjal philosophical  treatises that the one who cannot be touched by the five kleshas - namely avidya [ignorance/illusion], asmita [egoism], raag [passion], dvesh [hatred] and abhinibesh [attachment], as well as karma with its detrimental consequences - is God.  As in - avidyasmitaragadveshacinibeshah panchakleshah - Sadhanapada - no. 3 kleshakarmavipakashaiyeraparamristah purushavishesha ishvarah - Samadhipada - no. 24 Now, if we leave the outer form, these eight great obstacles on the path of liberation mentioned by Patanjal will be revealed in these two slokas.  As in - Krip (krip whose essence is to imagine) - This imagination is the foe of knowledge and is the source of all of the kleshas.  By this, the one is deluded into perceiving the finite as infinite, the impure as pure, misery as happiness, the non-soul as soul.  This is the primary klesha of the five kleshas mentioned by Patanjal.  Its name is “avidya.”  As in - anityashuchiduhkhanatmasu nityashuchisukhatmakhyatirvidya - Sadhanapada - no.5 It has been clearly shown in the commentary to the first sloka that Bhisma (Chidabhas) is a type of consciousness, the observer of this world and the inner light of a jiva, without which nothing can be seen by the jiva.  Therefore he is the power of perception.  In this consciousness both of the qualities of observation and perception are existent.  Because of this, the jiva is entrapped in the worldly matters.  This is the second klesha mentioned by Patanjal.  Its name is “asmita.”  As in - drikadarshanashaktorekatmataivasmita -   Sadhanapada - no.6 Karna (kri-na):  dutiful work.  One can have sublime happiness in worldly life if one can do this dutiful work.  Because of this, the mind has great affection for it.  This is the third klesha mentioned by Patanjal.  It’s name is “raag.”  As in - duhkhanushayi raagah -  Sadhanapada - no. 7 Vikarna (vi-kri-na):  work that is not one’s duty.  Because of this, one has to suffer much in worldly life.  Therefore, the mind quite detests it.  This is the fourth klesha mentioned by Patanjal.  It’s name is “dvesh.”  As in - duhkhanushayi dveshah -   Sadhanapada - no. 8 Jayadratha (residing in affection with doership) - he is “Sindhuraj,” the king of the ocean of the world, meaning the primary reason for being enchained to worldly life.  Great knowledgeable beings do not want to leave the body because of this inclination; they want to remain bound to the body.  This is the fifth klesha mentioned by Pantanjal.  It’s name is “abhinibesh.”  As in - svarasabahividushopi tamvanubandhohbhinibeshah -   Sadhanapada - no. 9 The son of Somadatta, Bhurishrava (who is continuously deteriorating):  karma.  About this subject, here is what is written in the book, “Atmajnana Nirnaya”:  Whether it is good or bad, if at one point karma is not finally worn away and finished, the jiva will not be liberated, not in innumerable ages.  As in - yavanna kshiyate karmashubhanchashubhameva ba tavanna jayate mokshah nrisham kalpashatairapi The union of Drona (the liquid form of karma, meaning samskara) and the power of imagination (Kripi) give rise to desire.  It is this bondage to samskara (the detrimental consequence of karma) that causes the jiva to travel from womb to womb and acquire lifespan and pleasure accordingly.  In Patanjal, this is what is written about the subject:  as in - satimule tadvipako jatyaurbhogah -   Sadhanapada - no. 13 Ashvatthama (that which is stored and is not destroyed with the body):  desire.  It is because of this desire that the body of a jiva is created again.  Even at the end of ages there is no destruction of it.  The world is appears because of the presence of desire in the three-guna-filled Prakriti.  It is referred to as “anadi” in Patanjal.  As in - tasamanaditvanchashishe nityatvat -   Kaivalyapada - no. 10 These faculties, as significant characters on the side of the worldly life of pravritti, are standing as adversaries to nivritti, meaning the forms of obstacles to liberation. -  7 and 8 -