### Prose 
 --- 
श्रीभगवानुवाच |
असंशयं महाबाहो मनो दुर्निग्रहं चलम् |
अभ्यासेन तु कौन्तेय वैराग्येण च गृह्यते || 35||
śhrī bhagavān uvācha
asanśhayaṁ mahā-bāho mano durnigrahaṁ chalam
abhyāsena tu kaunteya vairāgyeṇa cha gṛihyate

### Transliteration 
 --- 
asamshayam mahabaho mano durnigrahachanchalam abhyasena tu kaunteya vairagyena cha grihyate. - 35-

### Translation 
 --- 
Govinda said, listen to what I say, Dhananjaya What you are saying is all true The turbulent and uncontrollable mind is very restless Who has the power to coerce it back in Wherever the mind goes whether true or false Bring it back from those places and establish it in Me By non-attachment become disinterested in things By these two is the power to control the mind - 35-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: It is necessary to clearly explain the matters of practice [abhyas] and non-attachment [vairagya] which are mentioned in this sloka, because these two are the primary aspects of yogic methods, or it can be said that all yogic methods are only the body and limbs of these two. Therefore, some of what has been said about these two subjects by the most esteemed sages is being explained below. Maharshi Patanjali has written about this subject in the book named “Yogasutra” in this way: that just as when a certain type of substance is mixed with a different type of substance, a change occurs in the natural condition of the original substance and thereby that substance transforms to a mutated state, in the same way, when consciousness mingles with external matters of sound, touch, sight, taste and sound etc., it becomes attached to them and a change of its natural condition occurs, because of which it then exists in a distorted condition. Thus, if it is not able to abstain from all those things, consciousness can never reside in its natural state. If consciousness is able to abstain from things in order to remain in its natural state, then gradually, four states of being, one after another, arise in consciousness. First, by discerning the transitory nature of things and becoming aware of its own corrupted condition, an effortful state emerges within consciousness, with consciousness wanting to attain its natural state of being. The scriptural saints call this effortful condition the “yataman avastha” of consciousness. After this, consciousness gradually continues to discard the causes of its distortions. This type condition of consciousness in the scriptures is called “vyatirek avastha.” Then, the distorted conditions in consciousness that still occur because of attachment to previous tendencies [samskaras] from time to time even after having eradicated all causes [of corruption] are brought into awareness, and the state attained by consciousness from wanting to achieve peace from that is called in the scriptures as “ekindriyavastha.” After that, when all distortions and even their samskaras are eliminated, a type of peaceful state of being is obtained where any types of matters relating to visible things or supernatural intimations - no kinds of desires for anything can arise. Always, consciousness remains in its natural state. This is what the scripturral saints have called as the “vashikar avastha” of consciousness. Maharshi Patanjali has called this vashikar avastha as having the same meaning as “vairagya” [non-attachment]. As in - “drishtanushavikavishayavitrishnasya vashikarasamjnya vairagyam” -  no. 15 - patanjal yogasutre samadhipadah Just as when many children recite loudly and in unison, the recitations of those whose voices are more physically strong are able to be heard, and those whose voices are subtle, meaning mellow, are not able to be heard at all, in the same way, because mind experiences many types of physical things and remains engaged in their momentary and miniscule happiness, it is unable to experience that extremely subtle and internal, Eternal Knowledge and Bliss.  Thus, not attaining purity because of the mind totally being in the experience of happiness from all kinds of material and physical things, that extremely subtle, Infinite Knowledge and Consciousness-Self in the Form of Bliss is not experienced.  Therefore, not being immersed in the corruption-causing external things and remaining in its natural state, consciousness is able to experience that infinite and eternal knowledge and the Consciousness-Self in the Form of Bliss.  In this way, practicing residing in the state of that Eternal and Infinite Form of Knowledge-Bliss of the Atman-Consciousness is what is referred to in the Patanjal Yoga Sutra as “abhyas” [practice].  As in - “tatra sthitau yatnohabhyasah” -  Samadhipada - no. 13 In this way, experiencing Atman-Consciousness, and continuously practicing residing in the Bliss of Self-Knowledge, the desire for happiness connected with the enjoyment of physical things is gradually eliminated, and consciousness resides in a state of “vashikar” [independent/sovereign], which is the emergence of what is synonymously known as vairagya [non-attachment].  And if one can become devoid of the desire for happiness connected with the enjoyment of physical things, meaning if the aforementioned state of “vashikar”, or the emergence of what is synonymously known as vairagya, occurs, then that Infinite Consciousness is experienced.  Thus, without the practice of experiencing Atman-Consciousness for a while, the emergence of vairagya is impossible, and without such vairagya, the experience of Atman-Consciousness is also impossible; therefore, both are unattainable.   To resolve this unattainable condition it is essential to take refuge in the Lotus Feet of Sadguru.  With regular and disciplined practice of their directives, as instructed in the 10th through the 14th slokas of this chapter, and engaging in the performance of yogakriya, in the state at the end of Kriya, more or less, little by little, Atman-Consciousness is experienced for moments at a time.  In this way, experiencing Atman-Consciousness, mind attains stillness in the Bliss of Self-Knowledge.   When mind is filled with the Bliss of Atman in such moments, it recognizes the momentary enjoyment of happiness connected with physical things as extremely trivial.  If one can practice this experience of Atman-Consciousness ceaselessly for a long time while being fully disciplined, chaste, reverent, devoted and doing good works with non-attachment, then the state of the Bliss of Self-Knowledge becomes eternally present.  Maharshi Patanjali has also written on this matter.  As in - “sa tu dirghakalanairantaryasatkarasevito dridhrabhumih” -  no. 18 - patanjal yogasutre samadhipadah With the aforementioned Atman-Bliss-filled state at the end of the yogakriya acquired through the grace of Sadguru, having left behind the happiness connected with the enjoyment of physical things, by which a type of care arises whereby the “yatamanavastha” is attained - the thread of vairagya appears in consciousness.  If one does not attempt to corrupt consciousness again by thoughts of things associated with sound, touch, sight, taste, smell, etc., and many such types of associations with bad company such as these, then by this type of practice, the second level of vairagya gradually arises in consciousness in the form of “vyatirekavastha,” and progressively, after the third level in the form of “ekendriyavastha” emerges, consciousness attains the ultimate end of vairagya - the “vashikaravastha.”  It is written in the Patanjal Yoga Sutra that it is in this “vashikaravastha” that the knowledge of Purusha, meaning the incisive vision of Purusha-Prakriti, is born in the jiva, and from the understanding of that Prakriti-Purusha, the spoken and the unspoken, meaning creation and destruction, or even the desire to be embodied are extinguished, the jiva attains that Eternal, filled with the Bliss of Knowledge, Brahman-ness.  As in - “tat parampurushakhyatergunavaitrishnyam” -  Samadhipada - no. 16 Now, the meaning of this sloka is this:  even if mind is brought into stillness momentarily by yogakriya, the always-restless consciousness of the matter-oriented mind again assumes its former condition; therefore, to quell the mind, meaning destroying this restless nature of mind, establishing stillness and experiencing the omnipresence of Total Brahman is tremendously difficult - there is no doubt about this.  But by attaining the stillness at the end of the yogakriya acquired by Sadguru’s grace, and continuously practicing the experience of Atman-Consciousness with reverence and pure work, the state of Bliss of Self-Knowledge is realized, and the enjoyment of happiness connected with physical things is understood as extremely trivial, and as the ultimate end of vairagya -”vashikaravastha” - becomes present, one becomes effortlessly aware that all of the Cosmos is filled with Total Brahman-Consciousness. - 35-