### Prose 
 --- 
पाञ्चजन्यं हृषीकेशो देवदत्तं धनञ्जय: |
पौण्ड्रं दध्मौ महाशङ्खं भीमकर्मा वृकोदर: || 15||
pāñchajanyaṁ hṛiṣhīkeśho devadattaṁ dhanañjayaḥ
pauṇḍraṁ dadhmau mahā-śhaṅkhaṁ bhīma-karmā vṛikodaraḥ

अनन्तविजयं राजा कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिर: |
नकुल: सहदेवश्च सुघोषमणिपुष्पकौ || 16||
anantavijayaṁ rājā kuntī-putro yudhiṣhṭhiraḥ
nakulaḥ sahadevaśhcha sughoṣha-maṇipuṣhpakau

काश्यश्च परमेष्वास: शिखण्डी च महारथ: |
धृष्टद्युम्नो विराटश्च सात्यकिश्चापराजित: || 17||
kāśhyaśhcha parameṣhvāsaḥ śhikhaṇḍī cha mahā-rathaḥ
dhṛiṣhṭadyumno virāṭaśhcha sātyakiśh chāparājitaḥ

द्रुपदो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्वश: पृथिवीपते |
सौभद्रश्च महाबाहु: शङ्खान्दध्मु: पृथक् पृथक् || 18||
drupado draupadeyāśhcha sarvaśhaḥ pṛithivī-pate
saubhadraśhcha mahā-bāhuḥ śhaṅkhāndadhmuḥ pṛithak pṛithak

### Transliteration 
 --- 
panchajanyam hrishikesho devadattam dhananjayah poundram dadhmou mahashankham bhimakarma brikodarah - 15- anantavijayam raja kuntiputro yudhisthirah nakulah sahadevashcha sughoshamanipushpakou - 16- kashyashcha parameshvasah shikhandi cha maharathah dhrishtadyumno biratashcha satyakishchaparajitah - 17- drupado draupadeyashcha sarvashah prithivipate soubhadrashcha mahabahuh shankhan dadhmuh prithak prithak - 18-

### Translation 
 --- 
Sri Krishna sounded His conch shell, “Panchajanya” Falguni [Arjuna] sounded his conch shell, “Devadatta”  The conch named “Poundra” which was great in size Was sounded by Bhimsen [Bhima] on whom is this great task - 15- Yudhisthira Maharaj, the son of Kunti Trumpeted fully the conch shell “Anantavijaya” Nakula blew the one called “Sughosh”   Sahadeva sounded the “Manipushpa” conch shell - 16- The mighty Kashiraj, the strong Shikhandi Dhrishtadyumna, Birat and Satyaki - extraordinarily powerful - 17- Drupada, and the sons of Draupadi, the valorous son of Subhadra All blew their respective conches, O king - 18-

### Commentary 
 --- 
Commentary: From the earth element presiding in the Muladhar, the Pranava is experienced as the sound of mad bumblebees.  When this is heard, sadhakas know that attunement has happened in that area.  In this state, the questioning faculty of mind is dominant, and therefore, the question “Is this Pranava or not?” is present.  It is because of this that this state is called “Savitarka [in argument] Samprajnata Samadhi.” After the attainment of the aforementioned sound of bumblebees, from the water element presiding in the Svadhisthana a sound like that of a flute is experienced.  This is the sign of the state known as “Savichar [observation with enquiry] Samprajnata Samadhi.”  When the absorbed state of sadhakas elevates a little and the doubting faculty has been destroyed, from the faculty of certainty arises the enquiry, “What type of a thing is this Pranava?” From the fire element presiding in the Manipura, the Pranava is experienced like that of the delightful sound of a vina (Indian stringed lute).  This is the sign of “Sananda [joyful] Samprajnata Samadhi.”  When the absorption of sadhakas has elevated to this state, the faculties of doubting and certainty are dissolved, and by experiential consciousness one experiences the meaning of Pranava and an unspeakable bliss arises. Through focused Kriya, from the air element presiding in the Anahata lotus, a profound sound like that of a long-sustaining bell is experienced.  In this Pranava all of these internal faculties are dissolved and, because of the still remaining Ahamakara, by Asmita is this God-spoken Pranava-resonance experienced.  Hearing this, sadhakas know that they have ascended to “Sasmita [blossoming] Samprajnata Samadhi.” From the ether element in the all-important sushumna, victorious over all faculties, the Pranava expresses Itself like that of the sound of thunder.  In this sound, even Asmita is annihilated and the entire Universe is experienced as filled with Brahman and the perception of separateness in Nature is at once dissolved.  When this arises, sadhakas know that they have arrived at samadhi’s highest, seedless state, or Asamprajnata Samadhi.  When one ascends to this state, no form of samskara can emerge. Then, the mad bumblebees, flute, vina, long-sustaining bell and thunder - these five types of sound become one, and from that all-revealing Kutasthachaitanya an unspeakable resonance of Pranava rises and from the consciousness presiding in the different main nadis, many different types of sound spring forth. The above-mentioned states of Asamprajnata and the four types of Samprajnata samadhis, the sushumna nadi etc., the six chakras and their respective elements, and the many different types of Pranava-sound - these are all matters of direct experience; they cannot be acquired by indirect knowledge.  It is useless to try to make onne understand this through writing or any other method.  Without experiencing this oneself, there is no way of understanding it.  However, some help in awareness may be possible by the shastras, as I will explain below. On the subject of the six chakras, studying the science of physiology from this country and the West one comes to know that the brain, meaning the Sahasradal lotus, is the place of Total Consciousness.  Under the brain and above the spinal column, there is a nadi (medulla) located between the eyebrows formed like the shape of the back of a tortoise.  When one has total absorption - samyama - in that tortoise-nadi, then immediately restlessness is eradicated and a tranquil Light prevails.  About this subject, here is what is written in the Patanjal philosophical treatises:  as in - kurmanadyam sthairyam -   Bibhutipada - no. 32 It is signified by being two-petaled (pons varoli).  This the Ajna Chakra.  Through this, the mind enters the sushumna.  This is the door of the sushumna.  As in - dhyanatma sadhakendra bhavatiparpure ityadi -   Shatachakra - no. 35 Like a string, that tortoise-nadi extends through the center of the spinal column to the area of the anus.  That is called “sushumna” (spinal cord).  To the left of it, one named “ida,” and to the right of it, one named “pingala” (gangliatid cords of sympathetic nerves) - two very powerful nadis on either side of the spinal column extend from the area of the anus up to the back of the area of  the eyes.  The consciousnesses present in these two nadis (the presiding gods Moon and Sun, respectively) are responsible for the functioning of blood circulation, digestion, the intake of physical substances, urination and excretion, breathing etc.  These consciousnesses are only a reflection of the Moon and Sun forms in the sushumna.  Because of the Primordial Shakti Kulakundalini being asleep at the bottom of the sushumna, the aforementioned blood circulation, digestion, breathing etc. are works that are not under the control of the jiva.  The jiva is not able to willfully stop or start those functions.  Mind is unable to enter the sushumna via the two-petaled lotus and therefore faces front.  Because of this neither the sushumna nor any of the sixty-thousand nadis extending from it are under the control of the jiva.  They are operated by their own gods that preside within them, and the jiva controls by his own will the nadis in the front.  This is why in the scriptures, the saints call the back part “purusha” and the front part “prakriti.”  That prakriti, being dominant, tries always to cover up the jiva’s consciousness.  When this prakriti finds the jiva’s consciousness to be weak for any reason and veil it, through the united power of the all samskaras (resultant force), the jiva again takes birth according to where that samskara-power is attracted.  In this way, the jiva, who is a part of that Infinite All-Powerful Satchitananda-filled Brahman-Consciousness, goes through endless suffering through birth, death etc.  This behavior of prakriti is called “stree” [wife or woman].  Now, with the spiritual sense destroyed, the sense that - when a daughter is born from the marriage and physical union of man and woman, and the daughter is preferred over the husband - “the daughter is more important” - this sensibility is shown.  But if even through the veil of this body the purusha catches the beneficent glance of prakriti, then the eyes meet and become mesmerized.  Filled with this feeling, the visionary Vaishnavas sing: Oh behold, eyes The delight of the lovers - Radha and her Beloved Oh behold, eyes The Dark One - the new rain-cloud, and Radha, His lightning Now, when this type of beneficent glance occurs, prakriti gives up her need and reason to be dominant and, renouncing her behavior, becomes enraptured in ecstasy.  It is in this that union of prakriti and purusha happens.  This is what is called “yoga.”  With the Sadguru-graced Kriya, the mind, in a subtle form, passes through that door-like Ajna chakra and enters the sushumna by which the Kulakundalini Shakti is awakened.  That sushumna functions in five divisions.  Through the Kriya of the Sadguru-initiated sadhakas, the five distinctions in the sushumna are eventually and gradually experienced as five lotuses in the forms of chakras.  At the area of the anus at the bottom of the spinal column -  the four-petaled lotus Muladhar, at the root of the sex organ - the six-petaled lotus Svadhisthana, at area of the navel - the ten-petaled lotus Manipura, in the heart - the twelve-petaled lotus Anahata and the sixteen-petaled lotus in the area of the throat - these chakras along with their respective elements: earth, water, fire, air and ether -    the awakened Kulakundalini expeeriences them when they are revealed.  When that Primordial Shakti is awakened in the Muladhar, the mad buzzing of bumblebees is heard and the state of absorption comes into being, and when that chakra is pierced, the sound is heard like that of a flute upon arriving at the Svadhisthana.  In this way, as the sadhaka’s states of samadhi evolve from one to another, piercing through the chakras one by one, through the different sounds of the Pranava the mind, intellect, small consciousness and ego are eventually dissolved.  These states have been expounded upon previously.  Thus, the jiva-consciousness becomes free of the body of five elements and becomes completely purified.  This process is called “Bhuta-shuddhi.”  Later, when by the practices under Guru’s instructions those sixty-thousand nadis’ gods come under control, one can leave the workings of the body to them, meaning that one can become detached and separate oneself while keeping the body awake and alive and reside in God.  Then, after leaving the sushumna and arriving at the Sahasradal lotus - the place of Total Consciousness - one becomes united with the Satchitananda-filled Brahman-Consciousness and the Self-Knowledge “This Infinite Universe is Me” is revealed.  Therefore, there being nothing that exists separately to experience, Pranava, life, nothing is experienced. - 15, 16, 17 and 18-